
Do Physicians’ Financial Incentives Affect
Medical Treatment and Patient Health?
Jeffrey Clemens, SIEPR
and
Joshua D. Gottlieb, Harvard University∗
Job Market Paper
November 11, 2011
Abstract
We investigate whether physicians’ financial incentives influence health care
supply, technology diffusion, and resulting patient outcomes. In 1997, Medicare consolidated the geographic regions across which it adjusts payments for
physician services, generating area-specific price shocks that are plausibly exogenous with respect to health care demand. Areas with higher payment shocks
experience significant increases in health care supply. On average, a 2 percent
increase in payment rates leads to a 5 percent increase in care provision per
patient. Elective procedures such as cataract surgery respond twice as strongly
as less discretionary services like dialysis. Higher reimbursements also increase
the pace of technology diffusion, as non-radiologists acquire magnetic resonance
imaging scanners more readily when prices increase. The magnitudes of our empirical findings imply that changing provider incentives explain up to one third
of recent growth in spending on physician services. The incremental care has no
significant impacts on mortality, hospitalizations, or heart attacks.
∗Clemens: jclemens@stanford.edu, Gottlieb: jdgottl@fas.harvard.edu. We are deeply indebted to
Amitabh Chandra, David Cutler, Edward Glaeser, Lawrence Katz, and Andrei Shleifer for invaluable advice
and guidance, and to Philippe Aghion, Joe Altonji, Kate Baicker, Laurence Baker, Shai Bernstein, Rebecca
Diamond, Martin Feldstein, Amy Finkelstein, John Friedman, Claudia Goldin, Gautam Gowrisankaran,
Naomi Hausman, Stephanie Hurder, Erik Hurst, Erzo Luttmer, Tom McGuire, Mandy Pallais, Carolin
Pflueger, Jim Poterba, Dan Sacks, Jesse Shapiro, Jon Skinner, Doug Staiger, Seth Stephens-Davidowitz,
Lawrence Summers, Jonathan Sunshine, Heidi Williams, Danny Yagan, and many seminar participants
for extremely helpful comments and suggestions. We received crucial assistance from Dan Feenberg, Jean
Roth, Mohan Ramanujan, and Scott Walker with data and computing; from Janna Friedly, Daniel Gottlieb,
Stephen Gottlieb, Joseph Vita and Weiping Zhou with understanding treatments and their coding; and
excellent research assistance from Theu Dinh and Oren Ziv. We gratefully acknowledge support from the
Taubman Center for State and Local Government and the Institute for Humane Studies, as well as support
and data provided by the National Institute on Aging under grant 5P01AG031098-02 to the National Bureau of Economic Research. Gottlieb further thanks the NIA for a training fellowship provided under grant
T32-AG000186-23 to the NBER.
Critics have charged that fee-for-service medicine leads to high medical expenditures
without improving patient health.1 The incentives embedded in volume-based compensation
could drive physicians to provide large quantities of both beneficial and unnecessary care
when payment rates are high (Ellis and McGuire, 1986). Another view emphasizes that high
health care consumption may also reflect high demand from patients (Hall and Jones, 2007).2
Determining the consequences of payment policy choices is thus a pressing empirical task.
We study how changes in physicians’ financial incentives influence the health care they
provide.3 Since payment policies may influence medical innovation through their effect on
technology adoption, we also examine their impact on physician investment decisions.4 Finally, we investigate the consequences of incremental treatments and technologies for patient
health, a crucial outcome for any intervention in health care delivery.
We estimate the effects of payment rates using an overhaul of geographic adjustments to
provider reimbursements in the Medicare program. In 1997, Medicare consolidated the areas
across which it adjusts physician payments, reducing the number of payment regions from
210 to 89. This consolidation led to area-specific price shocks that are plausibly exogenous
with respect to other changes in local health care demand and supply. We use these payment
changes to estimate the effect of prices on care provision, technology diffusion, and patient
health.
We find that price increases lead to large, positive responses in the supply of physician and
outpatient services, with a long-run elasticity of around 2.5 with respect to reimbursement
rates. The response is twice as large for relatively elective procedures, including cataract
removal and colonoscopy, as for less discretionary services, such as oncological procedures and
dialysis. Theory predicts exactly this pattern; services with a clear benefit for some patients,
and none for others, should respond less to payment rates (Chandra and Skinner, 2011).
Increases in reimbursement rates lead physicians to adjust treatment patterns along several margins. More providers serve Medicare patients and those who do adjust both the
number and composition of services they supply. The responses unfold over several years,
1For instance, see Arrow et al. (2009), Ginsburg (2011), and Hackbarth, Reischauer and Mutti (2008).
2The care physicians provide has significant financial consequences, as 60 percent are self-employed
(Wassenaar and Thran, 2003, Table 2; 2001, Table 57) and 85 percent of those in group practices have
compensation linked to patient care revenues (Medical Group Management Association, 1998, Table 12).
3The existence, direction, and magnitude of any such influences are theoretically unclear and empirically disputed. The Congressional Budget Office (2007) and Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(Codespote, London and Shatto, 1998) assume that income effects drive a 30 to 50 percent “volume offset,”
or negative supply response (Gruber and Owings, 1996; Rice, 1982; 1983; 1984). But higher reimbursement
rates expand treatment along some margins (Mitchell and Cromwell, 1982; Paringer, 1980; McKnight, 2007),
and Staiger, Auerbach and Buerhaus (2010) argue that fee cuts reduced physician hours.
4Finkelstein (2007) finds that Medicare leads hospitals to expand capacity, and Acemoglu and Finkelstein
(2008) find that payment policies change hospitals’ capital intensity. Weisbrod (1991) and Chandra and
Skinner (2011) point to the interaction between insurance and innovation as driving spending growth.
2
suggesting that changes in profitability induce gradual changes in treatment.5
One such adjustment is investment in new technology. We investigate the vertical integration of office visits and imaging services that occurs when non-radiologists invest in
magnetic resonance scanners. Reimbursement rates influence these investment decisions and
hence the diffusion of medical technology. Just as Acemoglu and Finkelstein (2008) find in
the context of hospitals, Medicare’s payment policies spur technological investments. These
investments increase profit margins and medical spending.
Patients with cardiovascular disease may face significant potential gains from medical
treatments, as new technologies like cardiac catheterization have expanded treatment options. They also have much at risk since heart disease is the leading cause of mortality in
the United States (Cutler, 2004; Murphy and Topel, 2006). Consistent with our aggregate
results, price increases significantly expand the supply of health care to this group, with an
overall price elasticity of 1.2.
However, we find that new investment and expanded care have no significant effect on
mortality or health status. Among the overall Medicare population, we are able to rule out
mortality reductions that would be cost effective at conventional values of extending life.
Among elderly survey respondents, we find no evidence of impacts of additional care on
health status. Incremental care also has no significant effects on the occurrence of hospitalizations, heart attacks, and mortality for patients with cardiovascular disease.6
If anything,
incremental outpatient care is positively associated with hospital expenditures.7
These results are consistent with the RAND Health Insurance Experiment’s finding that
care induced by reductions in patient cost-sharing has little impact on health (Manning et
al., 1987; Newhouse, 1993). But they contrast with those of Chandra, Gruber and McKnight
(2010), who find that preventative care reduces subsequent hospital expenditures. The
broader packages of outpatient care we study appear not to generate offsets of this form.8
Physicians’ substantial responses to price changes suggest that payment rates play an
important role in driving medical care consumption. While extrapolation to other time
5Jacobson et al. (2010) find that chemotherapy prescribing choices respond increasingly to price changes
over time. Their results imply substantially lower elasticities than we find here, perhaps because our average
services is more elective. Cutler (1990) also finds lower elasticities for hospital services in Massachusetts upon
the transition to prospective payments, consistent with the more discretionary nature of general outpatient
care and with the weaker incentives at the hospital level relative to more strongly incentivized physicians.
6Existing literature studies the effects of differences in health care over time (Cutler and McClellan, 2001)
and across space (Fisher et al., 2003) on patient outcomes, using a sixfold increase in spending over four
decades (Cutler, Rosen and Vijan, 2006), a threefold difference across places (Gottlieb et al., 2010), and
the availability of Medicare upon turning 65 years old (McWilliams et al., 2007; Card, Dobkin and Maestas,
2009). We complement this work by examining the impacts of incremental care engendered by price changes.
7Our confidence intervals imply that at least $1 million in incremental care is required to prevent a single
heart attack.
8Cohen, Neumann and Weinstein (2008) compare the effectiveness of different types of preventative care.
3
periods is naturally imperfect, we find that increases in profitability can explain up to one
third of the growth in health care spending since 1982. Together with changes in patient cost
sharing (Finkelstein, 2007) and increases in the demand for health driven by rising incomes
(Hall and Jones, 2007), providers’ financial incentives appear to drive technology adoption,
influence patient treatments, and expand the health care sector.
1 Reimbursement Rates, Service Supply and New Technologies
Physicians face major decisions about the organization of their practices and the quantities of care they provide. A variety of investments in capital and skills can shift physicians,
and by extension their patients, into more and less intense treatment regimes. Orthopedists can acquire advanced imaging equipment, urologists can invest in radiation therapy
units, and cardiologists can integrate nuclear stress testing into their practices.9 These arrangements involve up-front investments that increase profit margins going forward.10 We
integrate these investment decisions, and their implications for the development of new health
care technologies, into a model of medical treatment under administered prices.
1.1 Medical Care Supply
All physicians can practice medicine using a standard practice style (S) that has a variable
cost of ¯c per unit of care. Physicians in some specialties also have access to an intense
practice style (I) that reduces unit costs to c but costs k > 0 to adopt. For instance,
acquiring a computed tomography (CT) scanner allows the practice to generate revenue
with low marginal costs and minimal use of the doctors’ valuable time. An innovation sector
works to develop technologies that enable physicians to adopt the intense practice style.11
Physician demand for the intense practice style shifts the research sector along its supply
curve, thereby influencing the extent of health care innovation (Acemoglu, 2002).
Because insurance diminishes or eliminates price sensitivity (Feldstein, 1973) and consumers lack information about treatment options, physicians make many health care decisions on their patients’ behalf (Arrow, 1963). We assume that demand is unsatiated, so that
9Affendulis and Kessler (2007) and Shah et al. (2011) show that vertically integrated cardiology practices
influence patients’ treatment courses, as does Baker (2010) for self-referral to magnetic resonance imaging.
10Since 80 percent of group practices have eight or fewer physicians (Wassenaar and Thran, 2003, Table
32), the lumpiness of small firms’ investments (Doms and Dunne, 1998) likely applies to physicians.
11Innovation also acts on other margins, such as making technology cheaper and increasing its productivity.
Trajtenberg (1990) finds that the real cost of a CT scanner declined by 55 percent per year during the decade
following its invention. We focus only on availability for purposes of simplicity.
4
physicians’ supply decisions drive the quantity of health care their patients receive.12 Since
physicians act, at least in part, as agents on each patient’s behalf, the patient’s benefit curve
influences supply decisions.13 Using Q to denote the market’s aggregate supply, we let b(Q)
capture the health benefit of marginal care. This benefit enters directly into the physician’s
utility function and drives different supply responses across service types. Marginal benefits
are decreasing in Q and individual physicians take b(Q) as given.
A continuum of physicians in specialty j has productivity γi distributed over (0,∞)
according to F(·), already known when they make investment decisions. Doctor i takes 1/γi
units of time to produce one unit of care. They each select a technology S or I and a quantity
of care q. Public health insurance programs compensate providers for this care according
to administratively set payments at reimbursement rate r per unit of care, as opposed to
competitively set prices (Newhouse, 2003). Physicians’ utility is quasilinear in income,14 and
for those adopting the standard and intense practice styles, respectively, utility is:
US(q; γi) = (r − c¯)q − e

q
γi

+ αb(Q)q
UI (q; γi) = (r − c)q − k − e

q
γi

+ αb(Q)q (1)
where e is an increasing and convex function of physician time that captures decreasing
returns to leisure.15 The last term, αb(Q)q, captures physicians’ desire to provide beneficial
care. This agency benefit is linear in the value of care, b(Q), the amount supplied q, and the
weight placed on patient benefits α. Proposition 1 defines physicians’ investment decisions.
Proposition 1 For specialties that have an intense practice style available, there exists a
threshold productivity γ
∗
such that physicians invest if and only if γ > γ∗. The threshold decreases in the reimbursement rate r and in the weight placed on patient benefits α. Aggregate
12While traditional Medicare does have co-payments, 90 percent of beneficiaries have either supplemental
insurance or are eligible for a state-funded Medicaid supplemental that reduces or eliminates patient costs
at the margin (Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, 2011).
13This contrasts with standard markets in which the benefit curve would simply describe demand.
14This treatment of income, which implies high-powered financial incentives, applies quite directly to the
three-fifths of American physicians that are self-employed (self-employment data are available in Wassenaar
and Thran, 2003, Table 2; 2001, Table 57). It is also a reasonable approximation of the incentives faced by
the 85 percent of physicians in group practices who, as of 1997, had their compensation directly linked to
revenue (Medical Group Management Association, 1998, Table 12).
The quasilinear utility assumption simplifies the analysis and predicts positive supply responses, which
are borne out in our empirical work.
15We assume that e(·) satisfies e(0) = 0, e0
(0) = 0, e0(·) > 0, e00(·) > 0.
5
supply increases in the reimbursement rate, with a slope given by
dQ
dr =
Z γ
∗(r)
0
dq∗
S
(γ)
dr f(γ)dγ
| {z }
Standard practice style
+
Z ∞
γ
∗(r)
dq∗
I
(γ)
dr f(γ)dγ
| {z }
Intensive practice style
−
dγ∗
dr f(γ
∗
) [q
∗
I
(γ
∗
) − q
∗
S
(γ
∗
)]
| {z }
Physicians switching practice styles
. (2)
The equilibrium described in Proposition 1, which is proven in Appendix A, involves two
classes of physicians. At a given reimbursement rate, firms above the productivity threshold
γ
∗
invest and have higher optimal production levels than firms with γ < γ∗, who do not
invest. The more productive firms are shown on the right in Figure 1, and the vertical part
of the solid line depicts the investment threshold γ
∗
.
The supply elasticity given in equation (2) is composed of three parts, corresponding
to the three regions of the figure. The first term, which integrates over the lower part of
the effort cost distribution, captures the supply shift from firms that do not invest at either
reimbursement rate. The second term captures a similar continuous shift from firms that
invest at either price. The “practice style effect” drives some firms to invest only after the
reimbursement rate increases, illustrated by the the shift in the vertical line. These firms
expand supply quantity dramatically after the return to investing increases. The magnitude
of this effect depends on the density of firms near the investment threshold (Caballero and
Engel, 1999), and is likely to be larger following a period of high uncertainty (Bloom, Bond
and Van Reenen, 2007),
This structure applies separately to each specialty along a continuum of specialties. Each
specialty j has Nj doctors, and Njis distributed across specialties with distribution H(·).
Within each specialty, physicians’ practice style decisions drive their demand for investing in
the intense treatment technology. The health care innovation sector can develop an intense
technology for one specialty by spending a fixed amount s on innovative activity. This development is profitable for all specialties large enough to overcome the fixed development cost,
namely those with Njk [1 − F (γ
∗
)] ≥ s. Higher reimbursement rates increase the demand
for productivity-enhancing innovation in each specialty, leading to additional research and
technology adoption by new physicians.
Proposition 2 The intense practice style is available for more specialties as reimbursement
rates r and the importance of patient benefits α increase.
1.2 Health Care Supply and Patient Welfare
Welfare in this market depends directly on patient health benefits. Physicians supply care
up to the point where their margins equal effort costs less the marginal impact on patient
6
health. When physicians value health gains (α > 0), supply responds less strongly to prices
than it would on the basis of financial motives alone. Supply responses are particularly small
when health benefits diminish rapidly as the market moves down the marginal benefit curve
(b
0
(Q) is very negative).16 This is likely true with emergency care, which has high benefits for
a small fraction of the population and no benefit for the remainder, and treatments such as
chemotherapy, which has significant side effects and is only worthwhile for cancer patients.
In contrast, elective procedures like cataracts surgery offer modest or moderate benefits for
large swaths of the population, implying flatter marginal benefit curves (b
0
(Q) is small) and
hence relatively large supply elasticities.
The quantity is only optimal when the social benefits of marginal care equal its cost.
Physicians’ optimization ensures that marginal costs equal the reimbursement rate. So the
equilibrium is socially efficient when r = b(Q∗), which only holds if payments are set optimally.17 A sufficient statistic (Chetty, 2009) for the welfare impact of price changes is:
dW
dr = [b(Q) − r]
dQ
dr .
Higher reimbursements reduce welfare when prices r exceed marginal health benefits b(Q).
While we can directly measure r using Medicare’s reimbursement rates, the supply response and health impacts must be estimated using price variation. We employ a previously
unexploited natural experiment for this task.
2 Price Shock From 1997 Payment Area Consolidation
We estimate the influence of price shocks on health care provision, technological diffusion,
and health outcomes in the context of Medicare Part B. This program finances outpatient
care and physician services for the overwhelming majority of elderly Americans.18 Any
private health care provider can offer care to Medicare patients in exchange for compensation
16Holding practice style fixed, a given physician’s physician’s supply response to reimbursement rates is
dq∗
dr =
h
1 + αb0(Q)
dQ
dr i
γ
2
i
e
00 (q/γi)
. With a more general utility function in income, supply responses would
depend on the relative magnitudes of substitution effects (Staiger et al., 2010) and income effects (Gruber
and Owings, 1996; Congressional Budget Office, 2007).
17This model analyzes the insurance market in isolation from the remainder of the economy. We thus
ignore both the production of other goods and the use of taxation to finance the consumption of medical
services (Baicker and Skinner, 2011). Any welfare analysis in this setting is consequently partial equilibrium.
18Medicare covers nearly every American over age 65, and some additional beneficiaries eligible due to endstage renal disease or disability. We study only those over 65. According to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, at https://www.cms.gov/MedicareMedicaidStatSupp/downloads/05SS_CostShare_z.zip
(Table 19a; accessed October 16, 2011), beneficiaries’ cost-sharing was 15.6 percent of total spending as of
2003, including that part paid by private supplemental insurance.
7
at rates determined administratively by the federal government. Hence the incentives facing
providers, consumers, innovators, and the exogenous determination of prices closely match
the setting we examined theoretically.
Since 1992, Medicare has paid physicians and other outpatient providers through a system
of centrally administered prices, based on a national fee schedule. While the fee schedule
assigns constant relative values to specific health care services,19 it also recognizes that
goods and services have different production costs in different parts of the country; Congress
mandates price adjustments to offset the higher input costs in high-cost regions.20 For service
j, supplied by a provider in payment area a, the provider’s fee is approximately:21
Reimbursementa(i),j,t = Conversion Factort × Relative Value Unitsj
× Geographic Adjustment Factora(i). (3)
The Conversion Factor is a national adjustment factor, updated annually and generally
identical across all services; it was equal to $37.8975 in 2005.22 The Relative Value Units
(RVUs) associated with service j are intended to measure the resources required to provide
that service. RVUs are constant across areas while varying across services, and one RVU is
approximately one brief office visit. Finally, the Geographic Adjustment Factor (GAF) is
the federal government’s adjustment for differences in input costs across payment regions.
The adjustments are derived from Census and other data on area-level rents, wages, and
malpractice insurance premiums. Reimbursements for physicians in county i depend on the
beneficiary-weighted average of input costs across all counties in payment area a. When
weighted by the health care provided in each county, the GAF has a mean of 1 and standard
deviation of 0.08.
We estimate the influence of prices on health care supply using changes in the GAFs.
Because input costs are correlated with factors that can independently influence demand for
and supply of medical care, a cross-sectional regression of treatment patterns on GAFs will
produce biased estimates of the effect of prices on care provision.23 To avoid this concern,
we identify the effect of reimbursement rates using GAF changes induced by a federal pol19These values are determined according to the Resource-Based Relative Value Scale (RBRVS), initially
developed by Hsiao et al. (1988).
20Pub. L. 101-239 (1989)
21This is a slight simplification; Appendix B.1 offers additional details on the structure of payments.
22The annual political wrangling over the “doc fix” results from the statutory formula, known as the
Sustainable Growth Rate, that drives the evolution of the Conversion Factor.
23Hadley et al. (2009) and Hadley and Reschovsky (2006) aim to overcome these challenges using the
imperfect nature of the area-level adjustments embodied in the GAFs. They estimate supply elasticities for
ten services off of differences between actual area costs and the Medicare reimbursement and find results
consistent with ours.
8
icy shift. In 1997, the Health Care Financing Administration consolidated many of the fee
schedule areas, leading to reimbursement rate shocks that vary across the pre-consolidation
regions. The 210 payment areas that existed as of 1996 were consolidated to 89 distinct
regions, as shown in Figure 2. The top panel of Figure 2 presents the regions as of 1996,
with darker colors indicating higher GAFs; the bottom panel shows the post-consolidation
payment regions.24 As the maps indicate, the consolidation of payment regions dramatically
changed the county groupings in many states, leading to differential price shocks. We estimate the responses of medical care supply, technology adoption, and patient welfare to these
shocks.25
A comparison of the maps in Figure 2, summarized in Figure 3, reveals several key
features of the payment area consolidation. First, substantial variation in reimbursement
rates was eliminated in many states. Wisconsin, Kentucky, Alabama, and other states were
collapsed from many regions to a single statewide payment area. The number of regions
was also reduced substantially in large states like Texas and California. Second, increases
in reimbursement rates generally took place in states’ rural areas while decreases took place
in their urban areas, as shown in Appendix Figure E.1.26 We address the possibility of
differential trends across these areas by flexibly controlling for time-varying rural-urban
differences, by directly controlling for a time trend in the price shock, and by using a matching
estimator.
2.1 Empirical Specification
Using the price changes described above, we estimate the effect of reimbursements on
care provision with specifications of the following form:
ln(RVUsi,s(i),t) = X
t6=1996
βt· Price Changei × It +
X
t6=1996
ζt· ln(1990 pop.i) × It
+ γi + δt + ηs(i),t + ζ
0Xi,s(i),t + εi,s(i),t. (4)
24Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands, which are omitted from the maps, were each
already a unified payment region before 1996.
25Geographic adjustments to hospital reimbursements under Medicare Part A are structured differently
from the physician and outpatient reimbursements discussed here, so were not affected by this consolidation.
26An anecdotally notable exception to this pattern is McAllen, Texas, the city highlighted as a highspending region in Gawande (2009). McAllen has particularly low costs, and hence was paid less than the
surrounding rural areas when it comprised its own payment region before the consolidation took place (top
panel of Figure 2). After it was consolidated together with almost all of the rest of Texas, its relative
reimbursements increased despite its continued lower input costs.
9
Our measure of health care supply is the log of total RVUs provided per patient seen in
county i in state s(i) during year t. We subsequently divide total care across service and
provider types. We also decompose care into the number of services and the intensity of the
average service to learn what care responds.
We estimate this equation using data at the county-by-year level. We interact the price
changed induced by the payment locality consolidation, Price Changei, with an indicator It
for observations in year t. We exclude the interaction for 1996, so 1996 is the base year
relative to which each βtis estimated. Estimates of βtfor years prior to 1996 provide a
sense for the importance of pre-existing trends that are correlated with Price Changei, while
estimates of βtfor years following 1996 measure the effect of reimbursement rates on care
provision. Since the quantity of RVUs per beneficiary is expressed in logs and the GAF is
an index normalized to a mean of 1, these βt can be interpreted as elasticities.27 We denote
county fixed effects by γi, year fixed effects by δt, and state-by-year effects by ηs(i),t. These
fixed effects capture the effects of other changes to payment policies and the structure of
medical care that took place during this time period, which we discuss in Appendix B.2.
In implementing equation (4) we calculate standard errors under the assumption that
the error term εi,s(i),t is clustered at the level of pre-1997 payment areas. The old payment
regions are the largest geographic units to be affected uniformly by the consolidation. There
are 200 such payment regions in our dataset, meaning that we allow for 200 clusters with
arbitrary within-cluster (including both cross-county and cross-year) covariance.28
We control for county characteristics Xi,s(i),t that were correlated with the consolidationinduced GAF changes in various ways. Most importantly, price increases occurred primarily
in rural areas while decreases occurred in urban areas. In our baseline specification we allow
for differential urban-rural trends by controlling for interactions between year indicator variables and the log of each county’s 1990 population. We confirm that the baseline estimates
are robust to controlling similarly for base-year quantities of care, population density, and
whether or not a county is located within a metropolitan statistical area. To reduce noise
resulting from changes in the health of the beneficiaries sampled from small counties, we use
standard controls for the fraction of each county’s sample that meets particular health and
demographic criteria. These controls have minimal effects on our estimates, and we describe
them fully in Appendix C.1.
27As discussed in section 6.2, this elasticity of care with respect to reimbursement rates is not the same
as a traditional labor supply elasticity. Roughly half of the reimbursement for each service is associated
with variable “practice” costs (such as staff time and non-durable equipment). The remaining half of the
reimbursement rate thus constitutes the physician’s accounting margin. The elasticity of care provision with
respect to this accounting margin is more directly akin to an elasticity of labor supply with respect to an
individual’s wage.
28Additional details on the pre-consolidation payment regions are in Appendix B.3.
10
Medicare periodically updates its geographic adjustments as it obtains new information
on local input costs.29 These updates could bias our reduced-form estimates if they are correlated with the consolidation-induced price shocks and we fail to control for them. To confirm
that the updates are not biasing our results, we explicitly use our price shocks as instruments
within a Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) framework. For this estimation, we group
the years in our sample into four categories: the four years prior to the consolidation, and
the short-, medium-, and long-run following the consolidation. These groupings are guided
by our initial estimates of the year-by-year evolution of care, as revealed in the estimates of
βtfrom equation (4). We interpret the two years following the consolidation (1997–1998) as
the short term, the following two years (1999–2000) as the medium term, and the following
four years (2001–2005) as the long run. We can then model the impact of the consolidation
on prices as:
Actual changei,T ime × T imet =
X
t6=1996
α
T ime
t
· Price changei × It
+
X
t6=1996
ζ
T ime
t
· ln(1990 pop.i) × It
+ γ
T ime
i + δ
T ime
t + η
T ime
s(i),t + ζ
T ime0Xi,s(i),t + uT ime
i,s(i),t, (5)
where
T ime ∈ {Short-Run, Medium-Run, Long-Run}.
Three equations of the form given in equation (5)—for the short-run, medium-run, and longrun post-consolidation time periods, respectively—constitute our model for the impact of
the consolidation on prices. We estimate these three sets of coefficients while simultaneously
modeling the impact of changing prices on health care quantity. We assume that this effect
has the form:
ln(RVUsi,s(i),t) = β
S
· Actual changei,Short-Run × Short-Runt
+ β
M · Actual changei,Medium-Run × Medium-Runt
+ β
L
· Actual changei,Long-Run × Long-Runt +
X
t6=1996
ζ
Supply
t
· ln(1990 pop.i) × It
+ γ
Supply
i + δ
Supply
t + η
Supply
s(i),t + ζ
Supply0Xi,s(i),t + ε
Supply
i,s(i),t . (6)
29A single interaction between the price change and years after the consolidation explains 65 percent of
the county-level variation in GAF during our sample, after controlling for county and state-by-year fixed
effects. A regression of county-level GAF on this same interaction variable yields an extremely significant
coefficient of 0.87.
11
By assuming that the price changes are orthogonal to the supply residuals, ε
Supply
i,s(i),t , we can
jointly estimate this system of equations (5) and (6) through GMM. We use a weighting
matrix that accounts for arbitrary correlations within clusters by pre-consolidation payment
region. Our results are extremely similar between the OLS and GMM estimations.
2.2 Medicare Data
Our data on health care provision come from claims submitted by providers to Medicare
for reimbursement. The data document all claims associated with a 5 percent random sample
of the Medicare Part B beneficiary population for each year from 1993 through 2005.30 The
same individuals are sampled each year, and the data contain line-by-line reports on all
health care Medicare buys for them. We compute a variety of statistics describing this
care. We obtain demographic information about our sample of beneficiaries from Medicare’s
Denominator files, and summary statistics for our sample are in Table 1.
We compute the aggregate quantity of health care supplied to this sample of beneficiaries
using the same scaling of individual services that the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) use in reimbursing providers. To each service we assign the number of
Relative Value Units that CMS associated with the service during the year in which it was
provided.31 Since the GAF is associated with the location of the service provider, we assign
services to counties using providers’ zip codes. We discuss details of these data in Appendix
C.1.
3 The Impact of Price Changes on Aggregate Care
3.1 Overall Supply Response
Our initial estimates of the effect of changes in reimbursement rates on aggregate quantities of care are shown in Figure 4. Panel A displays the year-by-year βt coefficients that
result from estimating equation (4). The estimates provide evidence that Medicare services
30Part B, formally known as Supplementary Medical Insurance, is the part of Medicare that covers physician services and outpatient care, including all of the fee schedule care we study. By including only beneficiaries participating in Part B, we are ignoring those recipients of Part A hospital insurance who choose
not to enroll in Part B, as well as those who choose a Medicare Advantage managed care plan instead of
traditional Part B.
31Assignments of RVUs to individual billing codes comes from annual files made available on the CMS
website at http://www.cms.gov/PhysicianFeeSched/01_overview.asp (accessed October 16, 2011). For
services provided in a year in which that billing code did not appear in the CMS file, we assigned RVUs based
on the closest year in which that billing code is observed, with a preference for preceding over subsequent
years.
12
respond significantly to prices, building towards an elasticity around 3 over the years following the price shock. Estimates for years prior to 1996 are suggestive of an imprecisely
measured pre-existing trend in service supply. Panel B displays a similar set of estimates in
which control counties—ones unaffected by the consolidation—were dropped if propensity
score matching failed to link them to an affected county.32 The coefficients are quite similar
to those in Panel A, with the long-run elasticity approaching 2.5. The βt coefficients for
years before 1996 give no hint of a pre-existing trend.
The year-by-year coefficients suggest that supply responses unfold over several years.
These results motivate our imposition of a short- (1997 and 1998), medium- (1999 and
2000), and long-run (2001 through 2005) structure on the response for subsequent analysis.
These year groupings allow us to both improve precision and summarize our results in a
smaller number of coefficients.
The baseline results in columns 1 through 4 of Table 2 reflect the results illustrated in
Figure 4. When we do not control for a pre-existing trend in the treatment variable (column
1 of this table) we estimate a short-run elasticity on the order of 1, a medium-run elasticity
on the order of 2, and a long-run elasticity on the order of 3. When controlling for the trend
in column 2, we estimate a short-run elasticity slightly below 1, a medium-run elasticity of
about 1.5, and a long-run elasticity slightly below 2.
We next estimate the reimbursement elasticities using GMM, as described in equations
(5) and (6). The results of this estimation are shown in column 3. They appear very similar to
the reduced-form estimates from column 1, suggesting that there is little correlation between
price changes that occurred independent of the consolidation and health care supply shocks.
Column 4 reports coefficients from a matching estimator, corresponding to Panel B of Figure
4. The point estimates remain stable and precision improves. Additional robustness checks
are reported in Appendix E.1.
3.2 Which Services Respond?
The implications of medical care responding to reimbursement rates depend on what
types of services are changing. We investigate differential responses across service types by
splitting health care using a standard classification of services, known as Betos categories.33
Table 3 presents separate reimbursement elasticities for procedures, office visits, diagnostic
tests, and imaging. The results imply large elasticities, ranging from 1.5 to 3.6 for these
32The matching procedure is detailed in Appendix E.1.
33The Berenson–Eggers Type of Service (Betos) categories (Berenson and Holahan, 1990) provide a mapping between each specific medical service and 106 aggregate categories of services. They are updated
by CMS annually to incorporate new service codes, and are available online at http://www.cms.gov/
HCPCSReleaseCodeSets/20_Betos.asp (accessed October 16, 2011).
13
broad service categories. Further analysis, presented in Appendix E, shows that the large
elasticity for procedures is particularly robust.
We further investigate the response of procedures by using the medical literature to split
Betos subcategories into procedures that are more or less discretionary. More discretionary
procedures include a variety of non-essential procedures for which the timing of the treatment is highly discretionary (e.g., major joint replacement, cataract removal, and a variety
of musculoskeletal procedures), intensive diagnostic services (e.g., catheterization and endoscopy) and procedures related to cardiac care, the intensity of which varies widely around
the country (Pilote et al., 1995). Less discretionary procedures include cancer and dialysis
treatments and procedures categorized explicitly as “repairs,” such as hip fracture repair.34
Year-by-year estimates for these subcategories of care are shown in Figure 5. The coefficients for supply of the most elective procedures increase sharply after the consolidation,
while those for other procedures are much lower and increase much more gradually after 1997.
As reported in columns 2 and 3 of Table 3, the long run response of elective procedures is
twice that of less discretionary procedures. This result means that health benefits play an
important role in determining service supply. As shown in section 1, physician concern for
patient benefits will result in relatively small elasticities when marginal benefits drop off
sharply for marginal patients. This is precisely how one might describe benefits from the
category of less discretionary services. Once all hip fractures are repaired the marginal health
benefit of an additional hip fracture repair is zero. These differential responses by electivity
imply that the overall composition of services shifts towards more elective procedures as
reimbursement rates increase.
The composition of health care may also change along other dimensions, such as service
intensity and the nature of inputs. We study these adjustment margins in columns 5 and 6 of
Table 2. These regressions decompose the baseline result into the margins of RVUs per service
and services per beneficiary. RVUs per service approximates the intensity of individual
services patients receive. The results suggest that the total response comes through both
margins roughly equally; intensive services thus exhibit larger elasticities than minor services.
In other analysis, presented in Appendix E, we examine which providers drive these
effects and where they are located. We find strong responses in the number of providers
seen by each patient, and we find that generalists and specialists both respond strongly to
reimbursement rates. We investigate the possibility that reimbursement rate changes have
non-linear effects and we find no supportive evidence. Physician responses appear to be
stronger in metropolitan counties than in relatively rural areas.
34A detailed classification of the Betos codes is available in Appendix C.2.
14
3.3 Health Impacts
In column 7 of Table 2 we estimate the impact of reimbursement rates on mortality and
find no significant effect. Short- and long-run point estimates suggest increased mortality
in areas with price increases, and the medium-run coefficient indicates the opposite. Even
at the lower bound of the 95 percent confidence interval—a mortality decline of 0.0095
percentage points per percentage point increase in reimbursements—incremental care would
not be cost-effective at conventional values of a life-year (Cutler et al., 2006).
We also measure the effect of incremental care on self-reported health and on use of
preventative care. Column 8 reports the effect of price changes on self-reported health
status using survey data from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. The point
estimates are negative and insignificantly different from zero. We can rule out health gains
of 5 percent of one standard deviation or larger, and declines larger than 27 percent of one
standard deviation, resulting from a 2 percent price change. Appendix Table E.7 reports
results for additional health outcomes, and finds no significant effects.
The results suggest that the care expansions induced by price increases had no detectable
patient benefits. They provide little specificity, however, regarding the manner in which
reimbursement rates dictate courses of testing, referral, and treatment for specific patient
groups. They are also silent about the responsiveness of specific treatments with strong
likelihoods of helping patients, and do not allow us to look at health outcomes short of
mortality. To gain more insight into these issues we next analyze patients with heart disease.
4 The Impact of Price Changes on Cardiac Patients
We now focus our analysis on patients with comparable medical conditions. Among
beneficiaries with heart disease, we look at how intensively different patients are treated and
determine the effects of price changes on relevant treatments and significant health outcomes.
4.1 Treating Cardiovascular Disease
Heart disease is the leading cause of mortality in the United States (Lloyd-Jones et al.,
2010) and its treatment has made a large contribution to increased life expectancy in aggregate (Cutler et al., 2006). Appendix D describes our protocol for assembling cohorts of
individuals with cardiovascular disease and measuring their treatments.
We study the effect of reimbursement rates on three imaging, testing, and evaluative
services that are non-invasive, low intensity and low risk. The first, echocardiography, is a
standard imaging technique for visualizing a patient’s heart, which allow the cardiologist to
15
evaluate its function and anatomy. The Medicare fee schedule pays $100–$200 for the test,
mostly as reimbursement for the associated practice expenses. The second, a stress test, is a
standard test in which a patient’s blood flow and symptoms are monitored during exercise
(usually, walking on a treadmill). Third, we record the number of distinct evaluative office
visits experienced by each patient.
We also study the effect of reimbursement rates on the frequency of three relatively intensive procedures involving cardiac catheterization. Catheterization, which requires threading
a catheter up an artery into the heart, can be both diagnostic and interventional. In addition to diagnostic catheterization, we study two related interventions: angioplasty and the
insertion of stents. Angioplasty reverses arterial occlusion by expanding a balloon catheter
within a blood vessel to push plaque out of the bloodstream. A stent is a metal sheath
that can be installed in a coronary artery to prevent future occlusion. Catheterization itself
is intensive, but low-risk, and earns the doctor roughly $300–$400. The medical literature
contains extensive debate regarding the risks associated with angioplasty and stent insertion,
for which Medicare reimburses physicians as much as $1,000.
We begin our analysis by identifying cardiac patients in the Medicare claims data according to the protocol described in Appendix D. Based on where patients live in the year
when they are first identified by this protocol, we assign them to a county and year cohort.
We then analyze the impact of our price shocks on the treatments they receive. We estimate
linear probability models of the following form:
Servicek =
X
t6=1995
βt· Price Changei(k) × It +
X
t6=1995
ζt· ln(1990 pop.i(k)) × It
+ γi(k) + δt + ηs(i(k)),t + ζ
0Xk,i(k),t + εk. (7)
This patient-level regression uses either an indicator for whether patient k received a given
service, or a count of the number of services received, as the outcome variable. Treatment is
modeled as a function of the price change (Price Changei(k)) linked to the county i(k) where
patient k was diagnosed. We omit those diagnosed in 1996 since their one-year followup would
include episodes of exposure to both pre-consolidation and post-consolidation reimbursement
rates. We therefore use 1995 as the base year in regressions of treatment outcomes on
reimbursement rate shocks (hence the t 6= 1995 index under the summations). In other
respects this regression follows equation (4), including county fixed effects, state-by-year
effects, and population-by-year controls. We control for patient-level demographic variables
and Elixhauser et al. (1998) comorbidities.
Summary statistics on these patients’ demographics and subsequent medical care are
16
presented in Table 4. Patients are distributed evenly across counties with different price
shocks, with the mean patient experiencing a shock of zero. Unsurprisingly, they come
disproportionately from higher-population counties. These patients require more care than
average, as they receive nearly $2,000 in physician services during the year following diagnosis
and more than $4,000 in hospital admissions. These numbers are around three times higher
for the subset diagnosed following a heart attack.
4.2 The Impact of Price Changes on Patient Care
We begin our analysis of patients with cardiovascular disease by examining the effect
of reimbursement rates on the care they receive. Figure 6 shows the impact of the 1997
price changes on the log RVUs received within one year of diagnosis. Care responds quickly
after the payment area consolidation, with the estimates for all post-1996 years implying an
elasticity on the order of 1. Column 1 of Table 5 reports the elasticity of 1.21 that results
when the effect is pooled across of these years. Column 2 expresses the result in levels of
care rather than logs. Columns 3 through 5 report the effect of reimbursement rates on the
probability that a patient receives relatively intensive procedures, specifically catheterization
(whether purely diagnostic or interventional), catheterization coupled with angioplasty, and
catheterization coupled with stent insertion. Column 6 reports the effect on the number
of patients’ evaluation and management visits, column 7 on the probability of receiving an
echocardiogram, and column 8 on the probability of receiving a stress test. Services of all
types exhibit significant responses to reimbursement rates. Consistent with results presented
in section 3, the implied elasticities are particularly large (in excess of 2) for the procedures.
Office visits exhibit the smallest elasticity, around 0.5, while the elasticities are intermediate
for imaging and testing, on the order of 1.
In Panels B and C we divide the sample into areas in the top and bottom half of the distribution of states when ranked by the frequency with which intensive interventions are used.
We proxy for this frequency using the probability that cardiac patients receive catheterizations. The elasticity of care provision is twice as large in the states that use catheterizations
most frequently. Among the specific treatments, the strongest differential responses appear
for diagnostic catheterizations, stenting, and echocardiographic testing. In results not reported, we similarly divide states by the average number of RVUs associated with care for
each cardiac patient. This second division produces relatively similar total care elasticities
across the groups, with more striking differentials across types of services. Catheterizations
responds more elastically in high RVU states while office visits respond more elastically in
low RVU states. High resource intensity thus predicts high price responsiveness of intensive
procedures while while low resource intensity predicts high price responsiveness of less inten17
sive services. In a similar vein, Jacobson, Earle and Newhouse (2011) find different effects
of reimbursement rates on physicians’ choice of chemotherapy drug across states.
Panel A of Table 6 summarizes our results for total care elasticities across patient groups,
adding a division of the cohorts into relatively young and old beneficiaries. Much like the differences in responses across states, where resource intensive states exhibit larger elasticities,
we find that care responds most elastically for resource-intensive patients. The estimated
elasticity of care for relatively old beneficiaries is nearly 40 percent larger than that for
relatively young beneficiaries.
4.3 The Impact of Price Changes on Patient Outcomes
Panel B of Table 6 reports effects on the probability that beneficiaries die within 4 years
of their initial diagnosis. The mortality result for the full cardiac cohort suggests that a 1
percent increase in reimbursement rates reduces the probability that a patient dies within 4
years by 0.04 percent. The standard error of 0.04 is sufficiently large that this value cannot
be statistically distinguished from either 0 or from substantially larger values.
Comparisons of mortality impacts across sub-groups of the cardiac cohorts yields richer
results. Mortality reductions accrue entirely to relatively healthy and less intensively treated
(at baseline) populations. Relatively unhealthy and intensively treated populations appear,
if anything, to experience increased mortality probabilities as their care regimes become
even more intensive. The mortality results are consistent with the view that care for these
intensively-treated populations has approached “the flat of the curve.” Coupled with the
large elasticities associated with care for these groups, our results imply that incremental
care is inefficiently allocated across the patient population.35
Panel D reports results for the probability that cohort members are admitted to the
hospital for treatment associated with an MI in the year following diagnosis. This constitutes an outcome of immediate concern for this particular cohort, as heart attacks are one
of the principal outcomes that cardiac care is intended to prevent. The results provide no
evidence that incremental care reduces the likelihood that a patient receives hospital care
associated with an MI. For the full cohort, we can rule out (with 95 percent confidence) the
possibility that a heart attack is avoided for any less than $1,000,000 in incremental expenditures. Indeed, for the older subset of beneficiaries the increases in outpatient care were
associated with a statistically significant increase in hospitalizations. This result need not
35We estimate the effect of reimbursement rates on life expectancy more directly using Cox proportional
hazard models, which are reported in Panel C. The results of this analysis exhibit a pattern similar to
those in Panel B; modest overall mortality gains appear to be concentrated among the relatively young and
among those in states associated with less intensive care regimes. Results from these models can never be
distinguished statistically from zero.
18
imply an increase in the occurrence of heart attacks among these individuals; it may reflect
complementarities between hospital care and incremental outpatient services. The evidence,
for older beneficiaries in particular, rejects the hypothesis that incremental outpatient care
generates significant offsetting reductions in spending on inpatient care. The offsets found by
Chandra, Gruber, and McKnight (2010), who focus on office visits and prescription drugs,
do not materialize for the broader packages of outpatient care that we analyze.36
4.4 Fracture Treatment
Theory predicts that supply elasticities will be small for services that are relevant, and
associated with large benefits, for clearly defined populations. We test this prediction by
looking at care for beneficiaries diagnosed with hip fractures. In columns 1 through 3 of Table
7 we estimate the effect of price changes on the provision of fracture-specific treatments and
general office visits to these beneficiaries. Column 1 shows that, as theory predicts, fracturespecific treatments do not respond to prices. Columns 2 and 3 show that general office visits
exhibit substantial price responsiveness (estimated in levels and logs respectively). Columns
4 and 5 report the effect of prices on the broader packages of care received by these patients,
with imprecise results in both instances.
5 The Impact of Prices on MRI Technology Diffusion
The results in sections 3 and 4 raise two questions: why are health care supply elasticities
relatively large, and what drives the dynamic nature of the response? In this and the
following section we consider margins likely to contribute to these features of the response.
We first study investments associated with the diffusion of advanced imaging technology. In
section 6 we consider adjustments in the mix of patients physicians choose to treat.
5.1 Physician Ownership of MRI Equipment
In recent years, physicians have increasingly acquired financial interests in the provision
of auxiliary services, many of which require substantial capital investments and subsequently
have large margins. As modeled in section 1, investments that influence profit margins can
have important implications for supply elasticities. A key feature of such responses—which
may include reorganization of the incentives within small-group practices, investment in new
36Appendix E.6 presents additional results for subgroups of cardiac patients, which are consistent with
those presented here.
19
skills, and investment in referral networks—is that they amplify the direct incentive effects
of changes in reimbursement rates.
When a patient complains of back pain, a traditional physician’s office might take a detailed patient history, prescribe a painkiller, and schedule follow-up appointments. Suppose
that variable costs, such as the staff time allocated to this patient, average 50 percent of
a practice’s typical service. For this practice, a 2 percent increase in reimbursement rates
would imply a 4 percent increase in the profit margin. Suppose the practice were to install a magnetic resonance (MR) scanner and schedule back pain patients for an immediate
MRI appointment, with negligible marginal costs, rather than the traditional labor-intensive
treatment course. Then the profitability of providing additional services will rise further. If
the adjustment reduces variable costs by 10 percent, the reimbursement change’s dynamic
effect on the profit margin will be more than twice its static effect.
Non-radiologists have increasingly installed MR and computed tomography (CT) scanners in their offices (Levin et al., 2008), in particular since the Stark law banned physician
referrals to outside entities with which the doctor has a financial relationship (Medicare
Payment Advisory Commission, 2009, p. 86). This installation involves a variety of financial
arrangements that have the common and crucial feature of giving the physician a financial
incentive to use the scanner more frequently (Mitchell, 2007). While their result may be
driven by either this financial incentive or by selection into MR scanner acquisition, Hillman
et al. (1990; 1992) show that self-referring physicians—those who recommend patients receive
an MRI that the physicians provide themselves—end up referring more of their patients for
MRIs and referring them more frequently. Baker (2010) finds that physicians increase the
use of MRIs following the acquisition of a machine.
5.2 How Do Prices Influence Physician Provision of MRIs?
To empirically study physician acquisition of MR scanners, we follow the procedures used
by Baker (2010) to identify MRI services and determine whether they were provided by a nonradiologist. We first identify all claims within the Betos categories representing MRIs. We
next consider the specialty of the provider listed on the claim. When the claim represents the
actual performance of an MRI and is provided by an orthopedist or neurologist, we identify
it as a non-radiologist MRI.37
We compute three statistics describing the non-radiologist share of MRI services in each
county. These are the share of total MRI services, the share of total MRI-related RVUs, and
the fraction of unique MRI-providing firms that are associated with non-radiologists.
37Additional details on this procedure are provided in Appendix C.3.
20
MRI provision expanded dramatically, both within our sample and for the broader population, during the period we study. Figure 7 shows the fraction of MRI provision undertaken
by physician-owned facilities. The share of revenues accruing to physician-owned facilities,
and the physician-owned share of firms taking these images, have both increased from around
2 percent in 1993 to 17 percent by 2005. The gain in the share of physician-owned services
was slightly smaller.
Table 8 presents evidence regarding the effect of reimbursement rates on the decision
to invest in MR scanners. The regressions follow those in equation 4, with the prevalence
of non-radiologist scanner ownership as the dependent variables. Columns 1 and 2 show
the impact of the shock to reimbursement rates on the fraction of MRI-performing firms
that are non-radiologist physician practices. We find a significant coefficient of 0.5 for nonhead/neck MRIs, and a marginally significant coefficient of 0.2 for MRIs of the head and
neck. These results suggest that a one percentage point increase in reimbursement rates
drives physicians’ share of MRI equipment up by 0.5 percentage points for general MRIs and
by 0.2 percentage points for head/neck MRIs. The differential is consistent with our findings
regarding elective and less-discretionary services, since MRIs of the back, in particular, tend
to be elective. In columns 3 through 6, we investigate whether this change in the composition
of MRI-providing firms translates into a change in market shares. We find that it does, again
for non-head/neck MRIs only. A one percentage point increase in reimbursement rates leads
to a 0.3 percentage point increase in the fraction of non-head/neck MRI services that are
supplied by non-radiologist physicians, and to a 0.46 percentage point increase in the share
of RVUs supplied by these physicians.
5.3 Back Pain Patients
To describe how changes in the provision of non-head/neck MRIs relate to changes in a
broader package of care, we focus on cohorts of individuals with lower back pain. Back pain
does not lead to adverse health outcomes that are measurable in the Medicare data (primarily
mortality), so we cannot estimate the welfare implications of this treatment. However, we
can study the effect of reimbursement rates on a broad set of treatment courses, ranging
from physical therapy to invasive surgery.
Back pain is common (Deyo et al., 2009) and often presents with no apparent cause. Deyo
and Weinstein (2001) document wide cross-sectional variations in patterns of treatment, and
the national time series shows a secular increase in back pain treatment intensity (Friedly
et al., 2007). We identify 880,236 back pain patients, as shown in Table 4, according to the
protocol in Appendix D.
21
By definition, back pain is diagnosed on the basis of symptoms, but physicians use
advanced imaging techniques to pinpoint the source of the pain. While these techniques
suffer a high rate of false positives (Jensen et al., 1994), they are nonetheless employed
frequently (Deyo et al., 2009). We measure the use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in
the lumbar spine of back pain patients. As shown in Table 4, 8 percent of back pain patients
receive an MRI within the year after diagnosis.
We study three treatments using the linear probability model of equation (7). The least
intensive treatment is physical therapy, which twenty percent of our sample receives despite
minimal evidence of effectiveness (Cherkin et al., 1998). We also study spinal injection of
corticosteroids, which may generate moderate short-term benefits (Weiner et al., 2006), but
which have not been shown to reduce pain over the long term (Lilius et al., 1989; Carette
et al., 1991; Yelland et al., 2004). Back pain patients can also receive spinal surgery (e.g.,
arthrodesis, diskectomy, laminectomy, or laminotomy) in an effort to resolve problems with
vertebrae or intervertebral disks. These surgeries are major operations with serious risks and
limited benefits (Weinstein et al., 2006; Atlas et al., 2005). They are performed on only two
percent of our cohort members.
5.4 Back Pain Treatments
Table 9 presents our estimates of the effect of reimbursement rates on courses of treatment
for back pain. Confirming the results from section 5.2, column 1 shows that MRI provision
rises with reimbursement rates, with an implied elasticity around 2.
Columns 2 and 3 investigate the extent to which the incremental MRIs found in Table 9
are provided by non-radiologists. Column 2 looks exclusively at patients receiving MRIs, and
asks whether the image was taken by a physician-owned facility. We find a strong impact
of prices on that probability, with a coefficient of 0.75. A 3 percent price shock increases
the probability that patients who receive MRIs have them taken by strongly-incentivized
providers by 2.25 percentage points.
The combination of the overall MRI response and the conditional ownership response is
shown in column 3. This regression shows the effect of price changes on the unconditional
probability that the back pain patient receives a physician-owned MRI. The estimated effect
is positive and economically large (implying an elasticity of 2.6), but is not estimated very
precisely.
Results for the treatments show that, in this setting where the literature finds minimal
benefits from all treatment courses, the least risky and least invasive service, physical therapy, responds most strongly to price changes. The implied elasticity is around 3, which
22
comes relative to an already high baseline rate of provision. The responses of injections and
surgeries are statistically indistinguishable from 0. Moderate changes in financial incentives
do not sway the typical physician to expose patients to treatments with substantial risks
and minimal expected benefits. But these incentives do influence investments and provision
of lucrative services with less potential for harm.
6 Substitution and Total Labor Supply
6.1 Substitution Across Patient Types
McGuire and Pauly (1991) emphasize that one potentially important response to reimbursement rates involves physicians’ decisions of whom to treat. Providers can substitute
between treating more profitable and less profitable patients due to either income or price
effects, and changes in the incentives associated with one set of patients can influence the
treatment of others (Glied and Graff Zivin, 2002). We explore the possibility that Medicare
payments affect other patients’ treatments using data on privately insured patients from the
ThompsonReuters MarketScan (“MedStat”) database.
We extract all 45 to 64-year-old privately insured patients from this database, in order
to have a sample as comparable as possible to the Medicare population while not being itself
eligible for Medicare. We run a regression like that described by equation (4), using the log
quantity of care supplied to privately-insured patients as the outcome variable. We examine
how this care response to our Medicare-specific price changes.
Results from this regression are shown in Figure 8. The point estimates are economically
quite close to zero. Even so, our confidence intervals encompass a wide range of possible
effects. We cannot rule out the possibility that increases in Medicare reimbursements lead to
substantial substitution away from the treatment of private patients. Similarly, we cannot
rule out the increases in such treatment that would result if physicians apply uniform practice
styles to all of their patients.
6.2 Physician Labor Supply Elasticities
Our baseline supply estimates yield an elasticity of Medicare services with respect to
Medicare reimbursement rates of 2.5. This differs from a more traditional labor supply
elasticity because the reimbursement rate is not equivalent to the physician’s wage; variable
costs associated with providing incremental services imply that net wages are smaller than
reimbursement rates. Medicare’s accounting of resource intensity implies that a physician’s
23
own work accounts for 40 percent of the cost of providing a typical service.38 Consequently,
we estimate that variable costs are 60 percent of baseline reimbursement rates. It follows that
a 1 percent change in reimbursement rates represents a 2.5 percent change in the physician’s
net wage. Hence the price elasticity of 2.5 that we have estimated represents a wage elasticity
of 1.
This elasticity is large relative to standard population-wide estimates. But it is quite
comparable to estimates specific to the self-employed or to other individuals with flexible
labor supply. Most directly relevant to our setting, Showalter and Thurston (1997) estimate a
labor supply elasticity of 0.6 for self-employed physicians in sole proprietorships. Saez (2010)
estimates elasticities around 1 for self-employed individuals with relatively low incomes, while
Gruber and Saez (2002) estimate a taxable income elasticity of 0.65 for individuals who
itemize their deductions.
This large elasticity likely reflects both the flexibility of physicians’ labor supply and
their adoption of fixed cost, high margin production styles. When many firms are on the
margin of making a significant investment, their responses to news about future productivity
are likely to be particularly dramatic (Caballero and Engel, 1999). More firms are likely to
be at this margin following a period of high uncertainty (Bloom et al., 2007), and the time
we study was such a period. Medicare’s fee schedule had only recently been introduced and
providers were learning how to respond (Newhouse, 2002). Failure of the Clinton administration’s health care reform efforts had resolved substantial uncertainty about the medical
sector’s immediate future (Cutler and Gruber, 2002), while managed care limited physicians’
discretion in treating privately-insured patients and could have made them particularly responsive to profitable opportunities in the public sector (McGuire and Pauly, 1991). While
this setting might have shaped the nature and size of the responses we find, it means that
generalization to other contexts is risky. With this caveat in mind, we now ask if these
results can help to explain broader trends in the health care sector.
7 Implications for U.S. Health Care Spending
Over the last half century, the U.S. health sector grew from 5 to 18 percent of GDP. The
category of health expenditures we study in this paper, physician and clinical services, grew
from 1 percent of GDP to nearly 4 percent. To determine the importance of supply responses
for this growth, we need to know how profit margins changed over time. We take physician
hourly income as an imperfect proxy for these margins, since it reflects the difference between
38This 40 percent margin is consistent with data from the American Medical Association (Wassenaar and
Thran, 2003, Tables 32, 35; 2001, Tables 22, 32).
24
reimbursements and input costs, adjusted for a measure of the quantity of care provided.
As shown in Figure 9, physicians’ real hourly incomes grew by 46 percent from 1982
to 2008. Over this same time period, real spending on physician services grew by 254
percent.39 According to our estimates, each one percent increase in margins leads to a one
percent increase in care.40 The observed increase in hourly incomes may thus have generated
nearly a fifth (46 of the 254 percent) of the increase in spending through its effect on the
quantity of health care provided.
This supply response is in addition to the direct effect of margins on spending. Since
physician income is 40 percent of revenue, a 46 percent increase in earnings translates into
an 18 percent increase in spending. Adding this direct effect to the behavioral response
suggests that changing margins explain 64 percent spending growth.
A similar calculation allows us to estimate the effect of reducing reimbursements in line
with the Sustainable Growth Rate (SGR) formula—the rates that would prevail absent the
annual Congressional intervention. The SGR currently calls for a 29 percent reduction in
Part B reimbursements, which would entail a two-thirds reduction in physician margins
(Congressional Budget Office, 2011). Our results imply that following the SGR since its
introduction in 1997 would have reduced Part B expenditure growth by 100 percentage
points, or nearly all of its actual 114 percent growth from 1997 to 2009 (Medicare Board of
Trustees, 2002; 2010).
Finally, the growing importance of fixed expenditures adds to the effect of changes in
margins on medical spending. As fixed costs grow as a share of income, income data will
understate growth in profits from incremental care provision.41 CMS data suggest that
capital’s share of physician practice revenue increased by around 4 percentage points from
1989 to 2006, or by around 10 percent of profit margins.42 Using the elasticity of 1 with
respect to margins, our estimates imply that increases in the capital intensity of care provision
may thus have led spending on physician services to rise by an additional 10 percent.43 In
total, we estimate that volume-expanding forces within fee-for-service payment systems led
to a 74 percent increase in spending on physician services. This is between one quarter and
one third of the 254 percent increase in spending on physician and clinical services over this
time period.
39We are grateful to Sean Nicholson and Peter Buerhaus for sharing income and hours data, respectively,
which we combine with other sources discussed in Appendix C.4.
40We discuss the relationship between margin and reimbursement rate elasticities in section 6.2.
41If the physician works h hours with a margin of m, and has capital costs of k then income is y = mh−k.
Letting κ = k/y denote capital costs as a share of income, and assuming κ is small enough that ln(1−κ) ≈ −κ,
then the change in margin is ∆ ln(m) ≈ ∆ ln(y) − ∆ ln(h) + ∆κ.
42These data are discussed in Appendix C.4, and are consistent with changes in hospitals’ capital share.
43We make the conservative assumption that capital’s share was constant before 1989 and after 2006.
25
When volume expansions generate minimal health gains, as in our setting, they can
be viewed as reflecting supply-side moral hazard. Supply-side moral hazard is more potent when patients are well insured, so physicians can increase supply without encountering
significant demand-side constraints. As analyzed by Finkelstein (2007) in the context of
Medicare’s introduction, insurance expansions ensured generous physician reimbursements
while significantly reducing consumer exposure to out-of-pocket costs. Our analysis complements Finkelstein’s by isolating the role of reimbursement rates at a time when consumers’
exposure to these costs was low. The advance of demand-side forces has also been of clear
importance over the broader time period. From 1970 to 2000, the share of spending on
physician services that was paid out-of-pocket declined from 45 percent to 11 percent. Resulting increases in demand-side moral hazard, coupled with increases in willingness to pay
for longevity (Murphy and Topel, 2006; Hall and Jones, 2007), may explain the growth in
spending for which purely supply-side forces cannot account.
Because of the growing costs of health care financing, policymakers have recently proposed
reducing health-care spending by dampening suppliers’ financial incentives. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) introduces a program of bundled payments, which
aims to eliminate the volume-expanding incentives associated with fee-for-service payments.
Under this system, an Accountable Care Organization (ACO) makes its own financial arrangements with individual providers. Similarly, the Health and Social Care Bill 2011 in the
United Kingdom introduces Clinical Commissioning Groups of general practitioners who are
financially liable for their patients’ care. How might these bundled payment systems affect
the quantity of care consumed?
Bundling payments is intended to give ACOs incentives to reduce costs. These incentives
could lead them to bargain with providers and reduce profit margins to the minimum required for physicians to accept their patients (Glied and Graff Zivin, 2002). This bargaining
may be particularly effective at reducing profit margins for technology-intensive specialties, which currently benefit from average cost reimbursement (Newhouse, 2003), relative to
other specialties. One way to estimate the likely importance of these differences in margin
growth across more and less capital-intensive specialties is to compare their hourly income
growth. Hourly incomes for technology-intensive specialists, including surgeons, radiologists,
and anesthesiologists, grew by 50 percent from 1982 to 2008. Family practitioners and internists had lower hourly income growth of 40 percent over this period. If this difference
represents higher margins, and ACOs are able to reduce this margin, payment bundling may
reduce expenditures in technology-intensive specialties by 14 percentage points relative to
others. As with other changes in care provision driven by payment reforms, the desirability of differential changes in care across specialties depends on the consequences for patient
26
health.
8 Conclusion
This paper finds that financial incentives significantly influence physicians’ supply of
health care. We estimate that a two percent increase in reimbursement rates across the
board leads to a five percent increase in care. Physicians disproportionately adjust their
provision of relatively intensive and elective treatments as reimbursements rise, and they
invest in new technologies in order to do so. Our results suggest that changes in physician
profit margins can explain up to one third of the growth in health spending over recent
decades.
Escalating health expenditures create risks for public budgets (Baicker and Skinner, 2011)
and raise concerns about the efficiency of care provision (Garber and Skinner, 2008). Contrary to assumptions embedded in the federal budgeting process, which err towards implying payment-rate neutrality, we find that spending rises substantially with reimbursement
rates.44 We find no evidence that the incremental care induced by higher reimbursement
rates improves patient health. These results have important implications for payment reforms designed to maintain quality while reducing cost. Analyzing the empirical effects of
such reform efforts will be an important task for future work.
44Federal agencies (Codespote et al., 1998; Congressional Budget Office, 2007) have long assumed a “volume offset” to Medicare price changes. Academic studies (Rice, 1982; Rice, 1983; Rice, 1984; Gruber and
Owings, 1996) have found supportive evidence by looking at individual services provided by existing physicians. But even the study conducted by the Office of the Actuary in CMS (Codespote et al., 1998, Tables 1,
2) finds a positive quantity responses to price changes when looking across different services.
27
References
Acemoglu, Daron, “Directed Technical Change,” Review of Economic Studies, October
2002, 69 (4), 781–809.
and Amy Finkelstein, “Input and Technology Choices in Regulated Industries:
Evidence from the Health Care Sector,” Journal of Political Economy, October 2008,
116 (5), 837–880.
Afendulis, Christopher C. and Daniel P. Kessler, “Tradeoffs from Integrating Diagnosis and Treatment in Markets for Health Care,” American Economic Review, June
2007, 97 (3), 1013–1020.
Arrow, Kenneth J., “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care,” American
Economic Review, December 1963, 53 (5), 941–973.
et al., “Toward a 21st-Century Health Care System: Recommendations for Health
Care Reform,” Annals of Internal Medicine, April 7 2009, 150 (7), 493–495.
Atlas, Steven J., Robert B. Keller, Yen A. Wu, Richard A. Deyo, and Daniel E.
Singer, “Long-Term Outcomes of Surgical and Nonsurgical Management of Lumbar
Spinal Stenosis: 8 to 10 Year Results from the Maine Lumbar Spine Study,” Spine,
April 15 2005, 30 (8), 936–943.
Baicker, Katherine and Jonathan S. Skinner, “Health Care Spending Growth and the
Future of U.S. Tax Rates,” Working Paper No. 16772, National Bureau of Economic
Research February 2011.
Baker, Laurence C., “Acquisition Of MRI Equipment By Doctors Drives Up Imaging Use
And Spending,” Health Affairs, December 2010, 29 (12), 2252–2259.
Berenson, Robert and John Holahan, “Using A New Type-of-Service Classification
System to Examine the Growth in Medicare Physician Expenditures, 1985–1988,” NTIS
Publication PB91-188599, Urban Institute Health Policy Center December 1990.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “How Much Should
We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
February 2004, 119 (1), 249–275.
Bloom, Nick, Stephen Bond, and John Van Reenen, “Uncertainty and Investment
Dynamics,” Review of Economic Studies, April 2007, 74 (2), 391–415.
Bureau of Health Professions, “Area Resource File, 1940-1990,” Rockville, MD:
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, Office of Data Analysis and Management
1991.
Burney, Ira and George Schieber, “Medicare physicians’ services: the composition of
spending and assignment rates,” Health Care Financing Review, Fall 1985, 7 (1), 81–96.
28
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M. R. A. Engel, “Explaining Investment Dynamics in U.S. Manufacturing: A Generalized (S, s) Approach,” Econometrica, July 1999,
67 (4), 783–826.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas, “Does Medicare Save Lives?,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2009, 124 (2), 597–636.
Carette, Simon, Sylvie Marcoux, Ren´e Truchon, Charlotte Grondin, Jacques
Gagnon, Yves Allard, and Marie Latulippe, “A Controlled Trial of Corticosteroid Injections into Facet Joints for Chronic Low Back Pain,” New England Journal
of Medicine, October 3 1991, 325, 1002–1007.
Chandra, Amitabh and Jonathan S. Skinner, “Technology Growth and Expenditure
Growth in Health Care,” Working Paper No. 16953, National Bureau of Economic
Research April 2011.
, Jonathan Gruber, and Robin McKnight, “Patient Cost-Sharing and Hospitalization Offsets in the Elderly,” American Economic Review, March 2010, 100 (1), 193–213.
Cherkin, Daniel C., Richard A. Deyo, Ernest Volinn, and John D. Loeser, “Use
of the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-9-CM) to Identify Hospitalizations
for Mechanical Low Back Problems in Administrative Databases,” Spine, July 1992, 17
(7), 817–825.
, , Michele Batti´e, Janet Street, and William Barlow, “A Comparison of
Physical Therapy, Chiropractic Manipulation, and Provision of an Educational Booklet
for the Treatment of Patients with Low Back Pain,” New England Journal of Medicine,
October 8 1998, 339 (15), 1021–1029.
Chetty, Raj, “Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural and
Reduced-Form Methods,” Annual Review of Economics, 2009, 1, 451–488.
, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,”
American Economic Review, September 2009, 99 (4), 1145–1177.
Clemens, Jeffrey, “Regulatory Redistribution in the Market for Health Insurance,” August
2011. Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, mimeo. Available online at
http://www.stanford.edu/~jclemens/RegulatoryRedistribution.pdf.
Codespote, Suzanne M., William J. London, and John D. Shatto, “Physician
Volume & Intensity Response,” Memorandum to Richard S. Foster, Office of the Actuary, Health Care Financing Administration August 13 1998. Available online at
https://www.cms.gov/ActuarialStudies/downloads/PhysicianResponse.pdf.
Cohen, Joshua T., Peter J. Neumann, and Milton C. Weinstein, “Does Preventive
Care Save Money? Health Economics and the Presidential Candidates,” New England
Journal of Medicine, February 14 2008, 358 (7), 661–663.
29
Congressional Budget Office, “Factors Underlying the Growth in Medicare’s Spending
for Physicians’ Service,” Background Paper 2597, CBO 2007. Available online at http:
//www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/81xx/doc8193/06-06-MedicareSpending.pdf.
, “Medicares Payments to Physicians: The Budgetary Impact of Alternative Policies,”
June 2011. Available online at http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/122xx/doc12240/SGR_
Menu_2011.pdf.
Cutler, David M., “Empirical Evidence on Hospital Delivery Under Prospective Payment,” November 1990. Harvard University, mimeo. Available online at http:
//www.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/cutler/files/Empirical\%20Evidence\
%20on\%20Hospital\%20Delivery\%20under\%20Prospective\%20Payment.pdf.
, Your Money Or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America’s Health Care System, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.
, Allison B. Rosen, and Sandeep Vijan, “The Value of Medical Spending in the
United States, 1960–2000,” New England Journal of Medicine, August 31 2006, 355 (9),
920–927.
and Jonathan Gruber, “Health Policy in the Clinton Era: Once Bitten, Twice Shy,”
in Jeffrey A. Frankel and Peter R. Orzag, eds., American Economic Policy in the 1990s,
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2002, chapter 12, pp. 825–874.
and Mark McClellan, “Is Technological Change In Medicine Worth It?,” Health
Affairs, September 2001, 20 (5), 11–29.
Deyo, Richard A. and James N. Weinstein, “Low Back Pain,” New England Journal
of Medicine, February 1 2001, 344, 363–370.
, Sohail K. Mirza, Judith A. Turner, and Brook I. Martin, “Overtreating
Chronic Back Pain: Time to Back Off?,” Journal of the American Board of Family
Medicine, January–February 2009, 22 (1), 62–68.
Doms, Mark and Timothy Dunne, “Capital Adjustment Patterns in Manufacturing
Plants,” Review of Economic Dynamics, April 1998, 1 (2), 402–429.
Elixhauser, Anne, Claudia Steiner, D. Robert Harris, and Rosanna M. Coffey,
“Comorbidity Measures for Use with Administrative Data,” Medical Care, January
1998, 36 (1), 8–27.
Ellis, Randall P. and Thomas G. McGuire, “Provider Behavior Under Prospective
Reimbursement: Cost Sharing and Supply,” Journal of Health Economics, June 1986,
5 (2), 129–152.
Feldstein, Martin S., “The Welfare Loss of Excess Health Insurance,” Journal of Political
Economy, March–April 1973, 81 (2), 251–280.
30
Finkelstein, Amy, “The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the Introduction of Medicare,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2007, 122 (1), 1–37.
Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Th´er`ese A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb,
F. L. Lucas, and Etoile L. Pinder ´ , “The Implications of Regional Variations in
Medicare Spending. Part 2: Health Outcomes and Satisfaction with Care,” Annals of
Internal Medicine, February 2003, 138 (4), 288–298.
Friedly, Janna, Leighton Chan, and Richard Deyo, “Increases in Lumbosacral Injections in the Medicare Population: 1994 to 2001,” Spine, 15 July 2007, 32 (16),
1754–1760.
Friedman, Milton and Rose D. Friedman, Two Lucky People: Memoirs, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1998.
Garber, Alan M. and Jonathan Skinner, “Is American Health Care Uniquely Inefficient?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2008, 22 (4), 27–50.
Gawande, Atul, “The Cost Conundrum,” The New Yorker, June 1 2009.
Ginsburg, Paul B., “Reforming Provider Payment—The Price Side of the Equation,” New
England Journal of Medicine, October 6 2011, 365 (14), 1268–1270.
Glaeser, Edward L., “Should Transfer Payments be Indexed to Local Price Levels?,”
Regional Science and Urban Economics, January 1998, 28 (1), 1–20.
Glied, Sherry and Joshua Graff Zivin, “How do doctors behave when some (but not
all) of their patients are in managed care?,” Journal of Health Economics, March 2002,
21 (2), 337–353.
Gottlieb, Daniel J., Weiping Zhou, Yunjie Song, Kathryn Gilman Andrews,
Jonathan S. Skinner, and Jason M. Sutherland, “Prices Don’t Drive Regional
Medicare Spending Variations,” Health Affairs, March 2010, 29 (3), 537–543.
Government Accountability Office, “Geographic Adjustment Indices Are Valid in Design, but Data and Methods Need Refinement,” Report GAO-05-119, GAO 2005.
, “Geographic Areas Used to Adjust Physician Payments for Variation in Practice Costs
Should Be Revised,” Report GAO-07-466, GAO 2007.
Gruber, Jon and Emmanuel Saez, “The elasticity of taxable income: evidence and
implications,” Journal of Public Economics, April 2002, 84 (1), 1–32.
Gruber, Jonathan and Maria Owings, “Physician Financial Incentives and Cesarean
Section Delivery,” RAND Journal of Economics, Spring 1996, 27 (1), 99–123.
Hackbarth, Glenn, Robert Reischauer, and Anne Mutti, “Collective Accountability for Medical Care—Toward Bundled Medicare Payments,” New England Journal of
Medicine, July 3 2008, 359 (1), 3–5.
31
Hadley, Jack and James D. Reschovsky, “Medicare fees and physicians. medicare service volume: Beneficiaries treated and services per beneficiary,” International Journal
of Health Care Finance and Economics, June 2006, 6 (2), 131–150.
, , Catherine Corey, and Stephen Zuckerman, “Medicare Fees and the Volume of Physicians’ Services,” Inquiry, Winter 2009, 46 (4), 372–390.
Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones, “The Value of Life and the Rise in Health
Spending,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2007, 122 (1), 39–72.
He, Jiang, Lorraine G. Ogden, Lydia A. Bazzano, Suma Vupputuri, Catherine
Loria, and Paul K. Whelton, “Risk Factors for Congestive Heart Failure in US
Men and Women: NHANES I Epidemiologic Follow-up Study,” Archives of Internal
Medicine, April 9 2001, 161 (7), 996–1002.
Health Care Financing Administration, “Medicare Program; Fee Schedule for Physicians’ Services,” Federal Register, November 25 1991, 56 (227), 59502–59819. Final
Rule.
, “Medicare Program; Revisions to Payment Policies and Five-Year Review of and
Adjustments to the Relative Value Units Under the Physician Fee Schedule for Calendar
Year 1997,” Federal Register, November 22 1996, 61 (227), 59490–59640. Final Rule
With Comment Period.
, “Medicare Program; Revisions to Payment Policies Under the Physician Fee Schedule
for Calendar Year 1997,” Federal Register, July 2 1996, 61 (128), 34614–34662. Proposed
Rule.
Helbing, Charles, Viola B. Latta, and Roger E. Keene, “Medicare expenditures for
physician and supplier services, 1970-88,” Health Care Financing Review, Spring 1991,
12 (3), 109–120.
Hillman, Bruce J., Catherine A. Joseph, Michael R. Mabry, Jonathan H. Sunshine, Stephen D. Kennedy, and Monica Noether, “Frequency and Costs of
Diagnostic Imaging in Office Practice—A Comparison of Self-Referring and RadiologistReferring Physicians,” New England Journal of Medicine, December 6 1990, 323 (23),
1604–1608.
, George T. Olson, Patricia E. Griffith, Jonathan H. Sunshine, Catherine A.
Joseph, Stephen D. Kennedy, William R. Nelson, and Lee B. Bernhardt,
“Physicians’ Utilization and Charges for Outpatient Diagnostic Imaging in a Medicare
Population,” Journal of the American Medical Association, October 21 1992, 268 (15),
2050–2054.
Hsiao, William C., Peter Braun, Douwe Yntema, and Edmund R. Becker, “Estimating physicians’ work for a resource-based relative-value scale,” New England Journal
of Medicine, September 29 1988, 319 (13), 835–841.
32
Jacobson, Mireille, Craig C. Earle, and Joseph P. Newhouse, “Geographic Variation in Physicians’ Responses to a Reimbursement Change,” New England Journal of
Medicine, November 2 2011.
, , Mary Price, and Joseph P. Newhouse, “How Medicare’s Payment Cuts
For Cancer Chemotherapy Drugs Changed Patterns Of Treatment,” Health Affairs, July
2010, 29, 1391–1399.
Jensen, Maureen C., Michael N. Brant-Zawadzki, Nancy Obuchowski,
Michael T. Modic, Dennis Malkasian, and Jeffrey S. Ross, “Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Lumbar Spine in People Without Back Pain,” New England
Journal of Medicine, July 14 1994, 331 (2), 69–73.
Kaplow, Louis, “Regional Cost-of-Living Adjustments in Tax-Transfer Schemes,” Tax Law
Review, Regional Cost-of-Living Adjustments in Tax-Transfer Schemes 1996, 51, 175.
Levin, David C., Vijay M. Rao, Laurence Parker, Andrea J. Frangos, and
Jonathan H. Sunshine, “Ownership or Leasing of MRI Facilities by Nonradiologist
Physicians Is a Rapidly Growing Trend,” Journal of the American College of Radiology,
February 2008, 5 (2), 105–109.
Lilius, G., E.M. Laasonen, P. Myllynen, A. Harilainen, and G. Gronlund, “Lumbar Facet Joint Syndrome: A Randomised Clinical Trial,” Journal of Bone and Joint
Surgery, British Volume, August 1989, 71B (4), 681–684.
Lloyd-Jones, Donald et al., “Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics–2010 Update: A Report
from the American Heart Association,” Circulation, January 26 2010, 121, E1–E170.
Manning, Willard G., Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett B. Keeler,
Arleen Leibowitz, and M. Susan Marquis, “Health Insurance and the Demand for
Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” American Economic Review,
June 1987, 77 (3), 251–277.
Maxwell, Stephanie, Stephen Zuckerman, and Pablo Aliaga, “Effects of the Implementation of Resource-Based Practice Expense Relative Value Units Under the Medicare Physician Fee Schedule, 1998-2002,” Technical Report No. 05-1, The Urban Institute March 2005. Available online at http://permanent.access.gpo.gov/lps78543/
Mar05_PE_RVU.pdf.
McGuire, Thomas G. and Mark V. Pauly, “Physician response to fee changes with
multiple payers,” Journal of Health Economics, 1991, 10 (4), 385–410.
McKnight, Robin, “Medicare Balance Billing Restrictions: Impacts on Physicians and
Beneficiaries,” Journal of Health Economics, March 2007, 26 (2), 326–341.
McWilliams, J. Michael, Ellen Meara, Alan M. Zaslavsky, and John Z. Ayanian,
“Health of Previously Uninsured Adults After Acquiring Medicare Coverage,” Journal
of the American Medical Association, December 26 2007, 298 (24), 2886–2894.
33
Medical Group Management Association, Physician Compensation and Production
Survey: 1998 Report Based on 1997 Data, Englewood, Colo., 1998.
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, “Impact of physician self-referral on use of
imaging services within an episode,” in “Report to the Congress; Improving Incentives
in the Medicare Program,” Washington, D.C.: Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, June 2009, chapter 4, pp. 81–100. Available online at http://www.medpac.gov/
chapters/Jun09_Ch04.pdf.
, “A Data Book: Healthcare Spending and the Medicare Program,” June 2011. Available
online at http://www.medpac.gov/documents/Jun11DataBookEntireReport.pdf.
Mitchell, Janet B. and Jerry Cromwell, “Physician Behavior Under the Medicare Assignment Option,” Journal of Health Economics, December 1982, 1 (3), 245–264.
Mitchell, Jean M., “The Prevalence Of Physician Self-Referral Arrangements After Stark
II: Evidence From Advanced Diagnostic Imaging,” Health Affairs, April 2007, 26 (3),
w415–w424.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel, “The Value Of Health And Longevity,”
Journal of Political Economy, August 2006, 114 (4), 871–904.
Newhouse, Joseph P., Free for All? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993.
, “Medicare Policy,” in Jeffrey A. Frankel and Peter R. Orzag, eds., American Economic
Policy in the 1990s, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2002, chapter 13, pp. 899–955.
, Pricing the Priceless: A Health Care Conundrum, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
2003.
Nicholson, Sean and Nicholas S. Souleles, “Physician Income Expectations and Specialty Choice,” Working Paper No. 8536, National Bureau of Economic Research October 2001.
Paringer, Lynn, “Medicare assignment rates of physicians: their responses to changes in
reimbursement policy.,” Health Care Financing Review, 1980, 1, 75–89.
Pilote, Louise, Robert M. Califf, Shelly Sapp, Dave P. Miller, Daniel B. Mark,
W. Douglas Weaver, Joel M. Gore, Paul W. Armstrong, E. Magnus Ohman,
and Eric J. Topol, “Regional Variation across the United States in the Management
of Acute Myocardial Infarction,” New England Journal of Medicine, August 31 1995,
333, 565–572.
Rice, Thomas H., “Economic Incentive and Physician Practice: An Examination Of Medicare Participation Decisions and Physician-Induced Demand.” PhD dissertation, University of California at Berkeley 1982.
34
, “The Impact of Changing Medicare Reimbursement Rates on Physician-Induced Demand,” Medical Care, August 1983, 21 (8), 803–815.
, “Physician-Induced Demand for Medical Care: New Evidence from the Medicare
Program,” Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research, 1984, 5, 129–
160.
and Nelda McCall, “Changes in Medicare reimbursement in Colorado: impact on
physicians’ economic behavior,” Health Care Financing Review, June 1982, 4, 67–85.
Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken,
Matthew B. Schroeder, and Matthew Sobek., “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0,” Minneapolis: University of Minnesota. 2010. Available online
at http://usa.ipums.org/.
Saez, Emmanuel, “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?,” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, August 2010, 2 (3), 180–212.
Shah, Bimal R., Patricia A. Cowper, Sean M. OBrien, Neil Jensen, Manesh R.
Patel, Pamela S. Douglas, and Eric D. Peterson, “Association Between Physician
Billing and Cardiac Stress Testing Patterns Following Coronary Revascularization,”
Journal of the American Medical Association, November 9 2011, 306 (18), 1993–2000.
Showalter, Mark H. and Norman K. Thurston, “Taxes and labor supply of highincome physicians,” Journal of Public Economics, October 1997, 66 (1), 73–97.
Staiger, Douglas O., David I. Auerbach, and Peter I. Buerhaus, “Trends in the
Work Hours of Physicians in the United States,” Journal of the American Medical
Association, February 24 2010, 303 (8), 747–753.
The Boards of Trustees, Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal Supplementary
Medical Insurance Trust Funds, “2002 Annual Report of the Boards of Trustees
of the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund,” March 2002. Available online at https://www.cms.gov/
reportstrustfunds/downloads/tr2002.pdf.
, “2010 Annual Report of the Boards of Trustees of the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust
Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund,” August 2010.
Available online at https://www.cms.gov/reportstrustfunds/downloads/tr2010.
pdf.
Trajtenberg, Manuel, “Product Innovations, Price Indices and the (Mis)Measurement
of Economic Performance,” Working Paper No. 3261, National Bureau of Economic
Research February 1990.
U.S. Congress, “The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989,” 1989. Pub. L. 101-239.
, “Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003,” 1993.
Pub. L. 109-173.
35
, “Balanced Budget Act of 1997,” 1997. Pub. L. 105-33.
, “Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Balanced Budget Refinement Act of 1999,” 1997.
Pub. L. 106-113.
Wassenaar, John D. and Sara L. Thran, eds, Physician Socioeconomic Statistics:
2000–2002 Edition, American Medical Association, 2001.
and , eds, Physician Socioeconomic Statistics: 2003 Edition, American Medical
Association, 2003.
Weiner, Debra K., Young-Sin Kim, Paula Bonino, and Tracy Wang, “Low Back
Pain in Older Adults: Are We Utilizing Healthcare Resources Wisely?,” Pain Medicine,
March 2006, 7 (2), 143–150.
Weinstein, James N. et al., “Surgical vs Nonoperative Treatment for Lumbar Disk Herniation The Spine Patient Outcomes Research Trial (SPORT): A Randomized Trial,”
Journal of the American Medical Association, November 22/29 2006, 296 (20), 2441–
2450.
Weisbrod, Burton A., “The Health Care Quadrilemma: An Essay on Technological
Change, Insurance, Quality of Care, and Cost Containment,” Journal of Economic
Literature, June 1991, 29 (2), 523–552.
Welch, H. Gilbert, Sandra M. Sharp, Dan J. Gottlieb, Jonathan S. Skinner, and
John E. Wennberg, “Geographic Variation in Diagnosis Frequency and Risk of Death
Among Medicare Beneficiaries,” Journal of the American Medical Association, March
16 2011, 305 (11), 1113–1118.
Wilson, Peter W. F., Ralph B. D’Agostino, Daniel Levy, Albert M. Belanger,
Halit Silbershatz, and William B. Kannel, “Prediction of Coronary Heart Disease
Using Risk Factor Categories,” Circulation, May 12 1998, 97, 1837–1847.
Yelland, Michael J., Paul P. Glasziou, Nikolai Bogduk, Philip J. Schluter,
and Mary McKernon, “Prolotherapy Injections, Saline Injections, and Exercises for
Chronic Low-Back Pain: A Randomized Trial,” Spine, January 1 2004, 29 (1), 9–16.
36
Figure 1: Supply and Effort Costs for Physicians at Two Reimbursement Rates
2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Quantity (Physician Hour−Equivalents)
Productivity (γ)
Physician supply with price change
q(γ, rH)→
← q(γ, rL)
← Practice style adjustments:
20% of total quantity growth
q(γ, rL)
q(γ, rH)
This figure illustrates the effect of reimbursement rates change on physicians’ threshold γ
∗
for investing in
an intensive practice style. At a given reimbursement rate, whether rL or rH, more productive physicians
(γ > γ∗) invest in the intensive practice style, and quantity supplied is increasing with productivity γ. As
shown in Proposition 1, an increase in reimbursement rates from rL to rH increases the quantity supplied for
a physician with any fixed productivity γ, and also reduces the investment threshold γ
∗
, meaning that more
physicians invest. The increase in supply due to the threshold shift is labeled “Practice Style Adjustments.”
The parameters underlying this calibration are given in Appendix A.3
37
Figure 2: Medicar