
The Long-Run Effects of
Cesarean Sections
Ana Costa-Ramón
Mika Kortelainen
Ana Rodríguez-González
Lauri Sääksvuori
ABSTRACT
We analyze the long-term effects of potentially avoidable cesarean sections
on children’s health. Using Finnish administrative data, we document that
physicians perform more unplanned C-sections during their regular working
hours on days that precede a weekend or public holiday and use this
exogenous variation as an instrument for C-sections. We supplement our
instrumental variables results with a differences-in-differences estimation
strategy that exploits variation in birth mode within sibling pairs and across
families. Our results suggest that avoidable, unplanned C-sections increase
the risk of asthma, but do not affect other immune-mediated disorders
previously associated with C-sections.
Ana Costa-Ramón is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Economics at the University of Zurich
and at the Jacobs Center for Productive Youth Development. Mika Kortelainen is a Professor of Health
Economics at the University of Turku and Chief Researcher at the VATT Institute for Economic Research.
Ana Rodríguez-González is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Economics at Lund University
(ana.rodriguez_gonzalez@nek.lu.se). Lauri Sääksvuori is an Academy of Finland Research Fellow at the
Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare and Professor of Practice at the University of Turku. The authors
thank Tania Barham, Pilar García-Gómez, Libertad González, Kristiina Huttunen, Ajin Lee, Matilde
Machado, Ciaran Phibbs, Marcos Vera-Hernandez. and participants at UPF Health and Applied seminar
series, HGSE Labor and Public Economics seminar, and at ESPE 2018, AES 2018, EuHEA 2018, PAA
(continued on next page)
[Submitted July 2019; accepted August 2020]; doi:10.3368/jhr.58.2.0719-10334R1
JEL Classification: J10, I12, and J13
ISSN 0022-166X E-ISSN 1548-8004 ª 2022 by the Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System
Supplementary materials are freely available online at: http://uwpress.wisc.edu/journals/journals/
jhr-supplementary.html
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND license (http://creative
commons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0) and is freely available online at: http://jhr.uwpress.org.
Ana Costa-Ramón https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4440-5822
Mika Kortelainen https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7868-9651
Ana Rodríguez-González https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8395-2282
Lauri Sääksvuori https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6960-043X
THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES  5 7  6
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
I. Introduction
There is little doubt that prenatal health and early childhood circumstances can have long-term effects on mortality, morbidity, and human capital development. The theory of the developmental origins of adult health and disease has proven
to describe a surprisingly general phenomenon. The effects of prenatal health conditions
and early-life events extend to a wide spectrum of educational, cognitive, behavioral,
and demographic outcomes (Almond, Currie, and Duque 2018).
In human development, the transition from fetal to newborn life at birth is an abrupt
event that represents major physiological challenges for the neonates. There is accumulating evidence that many medical and operative interventions at birth are associated
with long-term health. Most notably, cesarean delivery for low-risk pregnancies is associated with a wide variety of adverse short- and long-term health outcomes. However,
the causal nature of these relationships has received little attention.
The most prominent mechanism thought to mediate the long-term effects of cesarean
sections on health and disease emphasizes the importance of early exposure to a diverse
range of microbes that adjust the human immune system to appropriately react to
extrauterine environment. This general class of mechanisms is often dubbed either as the
hygiene hypothesis (Strachan 1989) or the old friends hypothesis (Scudellari 2017).
According to these hypotheses, children born by cesarean section lack the beneficial
exposure to their mother’s vaginal microbiome and are more prone to develop immunemediated diseases.
The cesarean section is the most commonly performed major surgery in many countries. Understanding the consequences of cesarean sections on later-life health and human
capital development is important from a number of perspectives varying from clinical
decision making to economic and health policy. The rapidly growing incidence of cesarean sections across the globe suggests that even small increases in mortality and
morbidity due to C-sections would lead to large reductions in life expectancy and substantial losses of human welfare.1
2019, SEHO 2019, ASHEcon 2019 and iHEA 2019 conferences for their comments and suggestions. They
are extremely grateful to Ritva Hurskainen and Soile Kivijärvi from Hyvinkää Maternity Hospital for the
introduction to the daily routines of a modern labor ward. This study has received financial support from
the Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare for the data access charges. Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen and
Rodríguez-González have nothing to disclose. Sääksvuori has received research funding over the past three
years from Yrjö Jahnsson Foundation and the Academy of Finland. The final data provided to the authors
are de-identified; thus, the research does not constitute human subjects research, and Institutional Review
Board (IRB) approval is not required. This paper uses administrative healthcare and employment data
maintained by the Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare and Statistics Finland. Healthcare data are
regulated under the Act on the Secondary Use of Health and Social Data (552/2019) and can be obtained
by sending a direct request to the Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare (https://thl.fi/en). The Finnish
Longitudinal Employer–Employee Data can be obtained by sending a direct request to Statistics Finland
(https://www.stat.fi). The authors are willing to assist in making data access requests.
1. Cesarean section rates have increased in the United States from 20.7 percent in 1996 to 32.9 percent in 2009
(Currie and Macleod 2017). In OECD countries, the rate of cesarean sections has increased from 20 percent in
2000 to 25 percent in 2013 (OECD 2013). Currently, the highest rates of cesarean sections are reported in many
of the world’s most populous countries including, among others, China (41.3 percent in 2016) and Brazil (55.6
percent in 2015). Boerma et al. (2018) review the disparities in C-section use around the world.
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2049
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
This paper provides new evidence on the effect of potentially avoidable cesarean
sections on several relevant health outcomes. To identify the causal effect and abstract
from cases where C-sections respond to a clear medical indication, we exploit variation
in medical decision-making depending on the type of day and time of birth. We show
that the probability of unscheduled C-section increases substantially during the normal
working hours (8 a.m.–4 p.m.) on working days that precede a leisure day. Importantly,
we find that these excess C-sections are not driven either by selection of different
mothers giving birth at these times or by advancing births that would have been cesarean
deliveries in any event.
Using fine-grained data on birth times and intrapartum diagnoses, we show that the
increased likelihood of cesarean sections during the normal working hours on days that
precede a leisure day is coupled with the increased use of more discretionary diagnoses.
Moreover, we observe that this change in doctors’ assessment does not affect mothers
who work in a medical profession. Our data lend significant support for the contention
that the excess numbers of unplanned cesarean deliveries observed during the normal
working hours on days that precede a leisure day are largely supply driven. We use this
time variation as an instrument for C-section birth. We provide a detailed discussion
and numerous robustness checks to support the validity of the required identification
assumptions.
We investigate the effects of cesarean sections on infant and child outcomes using a
comprehensive and precise administrative data resource that includes birth and health
records for all children born in Finland between 1990 and 2014. We follow entire birth
cohorts from birth to teenage years and use detailed diagnosis data to study the causal
effects of cesarean sections on children’s health. We focus on outcomes whose onset is
hypothesized to be influenced by cesarean delivery: asthma and other atopic diseases,
type 1 diabetes, and obesity. These are among the most common chronic conditions in
childhood (Torpy 2010).2 Our instrumental variable estimates suggest that avoidable Csections increase the probability of asthma diagnosis from early childhood onward. This
effect is clinically and economically relevant. However, we do not find consistent
evidence that cesarean sections affect the probability of developing atopic diseases at
large, type 1 diabetes, or obesity.
We complement our instrumental variables estimates using a differences-in-differences
model with family fixed effects that compares the health gap between siblings in families
where the second child was born by unplanned C-section with the health gap between
siblings who were born by vaginal delivery. The results from our supplementary empirical
strategy support our main findings. These estimates suggest that unplanned C-sections
increase the risk of childhood asthma and enable us to rule out meaningful effects on other
2. Understanding and quantifying the potential contribution of C-sections to the development of these diseases
is not limited to medical practice and health policy. Chronic health conditions cause an immense financial
burden to households and public healthcare financing. The total cost of asthma in the working age population
was estimated to be $24.7 billion during 1999–2002 in Europe (Global Asthma Network 2018). The two other
atopic diseases we investigate imply high costs. Atopic dermatitis has been estimated to cost at least $5.3 billion
(in 2015 USD) in the United States (Drucker et al. 2017). The estimated annual cost of allergic rhinitis is in the
range of $2–5 billion (in 2003 USD) (Reed, Lee, and McCrory 2004). Type 1 diabetes has been found to cost
$14.4 billion a year in medical costs and lost income in the United States (Tao et al. 2010). Finally, childhood
obesity, which has been on the rise in recent years, has been calculated to imply $19,000 per child in lifetime
medical costs in the United States (Finkelstein, Graham, and Malhotra 2014).
2050 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
atopic diseases, type 1 diabetes, and obesity. We provide several sensitivity checks that
suggest that the effect on asthma is unlikely to be explained by negative selection.
Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that the mode of delivery may influence
the development of the immune system and have long-term effects on health and
disease. However, our results paint a more nuanced picture about the long-term effects
of cesarean deliveries than existing evidence based mostly on associations. We show
that controlling for the observable characteristics that most previous studies have
accounted for is not enough to deal with the endogeneity of the type of birth. Our
findings suggest that C-sections cause a much narrower spectrum of diseases than
currently hypothesized and call for a careful analysis on the relationships between the
delivery mode and long-term health.
Our paper relates to an important literature estimating the effects of early interventions on long-term health and human capital development. Moreover, we contribute in at least three ways to a nascent economics literature on the effects of treatment
choices at birth. First, we investigate the long-term effects of unplanned C-sections on
children. To evaluate the costs and benefits of C-sections, it is crucial to investigate longterm effects, as potential alterations of the immune system and long-run consequences
of C-sections are not necessarily visible at birth and in early childhood. Moreover, we
report age-by-age estimates for entire cohorts from birth to teenage years and provide
evidence about the effects of early-life events during the middle childhood, thus
expanding our knowledge about the “missing middle” years.3 Existing papers investigating the effects of potentially avoidable C-sections have concentrated on neonatal
outcomes or short-term effects.4 Costa-Ramón et al. (2018) investigate the effects of
cesarean sections on neonatal health using time variation in unplanned C-section rates.
Card, Fenizia, and Silver (2019) study the short-term health effects of hospital delivery
practices using relative distance from a mother’s home to hospitals with high and low
C-sections rates.5
Second, we study the effects of discretionary unplanned C-sections that could potentially be avoided, while existing papers have not been able to separate planned (elective)
and unplanned C-sections or have concentrated on C-sections with a clear medical indication. Hannah et al. (2000), Jensen and Wüst (2015), and Mühlrad (2017) show that
breech babies can benefit from C-section delivery. However, these results concern medically necessary C-sections in a specific high-risk group and do not readily generalize to
avoidable unplanned C-sections or cesarean deliveries in general. While C-sections are
3. Almond, Currie, and Duque (2018) discuss that, due to data availability, most of the literature analyzes the
effect of early-life events on birth or adult outcomes. This implies that we have little knowledge about how
developmental trajectories are affected by policies or shocks experienced over the life course. They refer to this
gap in the literature as the “missing middle.”
4. To our knowledge, the only paper looking at longer-term effects is by Jachetta (2015). This paper explores
the relationship between cesarean deliveries and hospitalizations using regional variation in medical malpractice insurance premia in the United States as an instrument for C-sections. However, the instrument used in
that work does not necessarily allow for credible causal inference, since the author finds that higher premia also
predict delayed prenatal care, lower birth weight, and reduced gestational age.
5. A few studies have also examined the effects of cesarean sections on mothers. Halla et al. (2020) study the
effects of C-sections on fertility and maternal labor supply. Tonei (2019) studies the impact on mental health for
mothers with breech babies who undergo a C-section. Our findings on children health complement these
maternal results and contribute to obtaining a more complete picture of the effect of cesarean sections.
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2051
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
often life-saving at the top of the risk distribution (Currie and Macleod 2017), more
evidence is required about the effects of discretionary C-sections that could be potentially
avoidable.
Third, to evaluate the causal effects of C-sections, we use two different identification strategies based on somewhat different assumptions. Our instrumental variable
strategy builds on previous work using time variation in C-section rates in combination with high-quality administrative data. Moreover, we employ a differences-indifferences research design that has not been used in previous studies on C-sections.
For both methods we provide several pieces of evidence that support the credibility of
the identification assumptions. Thus, by using two different strategies, we hope to
provide more reliable evidence on the causal effects of avoidable unscheduled interventions at birth on children both in the short and long run. Furthermore, we reconcile
our findings with those from previous associational studies by showing that controlling
for even a very rich set of observable characteristics is not enough to deal with the
endogeneity of delivery mode.
Section II provides background information about the biological mechanisms hypothesized to mediate the effects of mode of delivery on infant outcomes, the different
types of cesarean sections, and the institutional context of our analysis. Section III
introduces the data, provides key descriptive statistics, and lays out our econometric
approach. Section IV reports our main results. Section V presents robustness checks and
additional evidence to support our main conclusions. The last section concludes.
II. Background
A. Mechanisms
A large body of literature documents the developmental origins of health and disease.
The process of labor can be seen as one crucial step in adaptation to the extrauterine
environment. The prevailing evidence highlights the role of vaginal delivery as an
important early programming event with potentially life-long consequences (Hyde et al.
2012). While there is strong consensus that medically indicated cesarean sections decrease the risk of fetal death at birth, the absence or modification of vaginal delivery has
been linked to several adverse health outcomes and anomalies in human development.
In the following, we summarize some of the most widely acknowledged findings to
understand how C-sections might have long-lasting effects on health and human development.
It is well recognized that early exposure to microbes is necessary to train the human
immune system to react appropriately to environmental stimulation. The original formulation of the theory, dubbed the hygiene hypothesis, states that the lack of early
childhood exposure to infectious agents and symbiotic microbes increases susceptibility
to multiple autoimmune diseases by suppressing the natural development of the immune
system (Strachan 1989). Lately, refinements to the original formulation, known as the
old friends hypothesis, have challenged the role of infectious pathogens and highlight
the importance of early exposure to a diverse range of harmless microbes to strengthen
the human immune system and combat the threat of environmental pathogens (Scudellari 2017).
2052 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
The mode of delivery may affect early exposure to microbes through several channels.
First, bacteria from the mother and the surrounding environment colonize the infant’s
gut during birth (Neu and Rushing 2011). Exposure to the maternal vaginal microbiota
is interrupted in a cesarean birth and externally derived environmental bacteria play an
important role in the infant’s intestinal colonization. Consequently, infants delivered by
C-sections acquire a microbiota that differs from that of vaginally delivered infants
(Dominguez-Bello et al. 2016). Second, the transfer of microbiota continues through
breastfeeding after birth. Breast milk contains a number of bioactive components that
can have an important impact on infant’s microbiota composition and health (Collado
et al. 2015). The negative association between cesarean sections and the initiation of
breastfeeding provides an additional mechanism to explain the differences in microbiota
by type of birth (Prior et al. 2012).
The potential biological mechanisms are consistent with the reported associations
between cesarean delivery and adverse infant outcomes. These studies relate cesarean
deliveries to a marked increase in the susceptibility of multiple immune and metabolic
conditions. Even though cesarean deliveries have been associated with a broad array of
immune-mediated diseases, recent meta-analyses conclude that C-sections are most
robustly related to asthma, atopic diseases, type 1 diabetes, and obesity (Blustein and
Liu 2015; Keag, Norman, and Stock 2018; Cardwell et al. 2008; Thavagnanam et al.
2008; Peters et al. 2018; Bager, Wohlfahrt and Westergaard 2008).6 However, the causal
nature and clinical relevance of these relationships remains largely unknown.7
B. Classification of Cesarean Sections
Cesarean sections are performed for several indications at different stages of the pregnancy. Cesarean sections are classified either as scheduled (elective) or unscheduled
operations. Scheduled C-sections occur without attempted labor and are agreed upon
in advance. The large majority of scheduled C-sections are performed during the
regular working hours (8 a.m.–4 p.m.) from Monday to Friday. Medical indications
that make scheduled C-sections advisable include, among others, multiple pregnancies with noncephalic presentation of the first fetus or placenta previa. We exclude all
scheduled C-sections from our sample.
Most C-sections are not scheduled and happen after spontaneous or medically induced onset of labor. Unscheduled C-sections are surgeries where an attempt of vaginal
birth is transformed to a cesarean delivery after the mother has been admitted to a
6. In addition to health outcomes, the literature has associated cesarean sections with worse cognitive and
emotional development (Bentley et al. 2016).
7. Hyde et al. (2012) summarize evidence from 14 RCTs that compare the effects of cesarean and vaginal
deliveries on infant health. All these studies are small RCTs conducted in populations of at-risk babies (for
example, breech delivery). These studies have had exceptionally large problems to achieve target recruitment
and do not include long-term follow-ups. Overall, there exist no RCTs to date that would enable one to
investigate the long-term effects of cesarean sections on infant health. Hyde and Modi (2012) report evidence
from survey studies that investigate the perceived acceptability of randomizing the mode of delivery to address
long-term health outcomes in low-risk pregnancies. The perceived acceptability of randomizing the mode of
delivery in healthy, term, cephalic, and singleton pregnancies remains low among obstetricians and mothers,
suggesting that adequately powered large-scale RCTs to compare the effects of cesarean and vaginal deliveries
on long-term outcomes may remain unrealized in the near future.
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2053
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
hospital. Unscheduled C-sections are classified by urgency. Emergency C-sections are
performed within 30 minutes of the decision, due to an immediate threat to the life of the
mother or the baby (NICE 2011). However, most unscheduled C-sections are performed
without such immediate threat. The optimal timing and indication for these operations
are imprecise and give large discretion to the clinician. Slow progression of labor or
cephalopelvic disproportion are examples of diagnoses that may require an unplanned
nonurgent cesarean section. There is wide variation among clinicians in the use of
discretionary diagnoses that justify C-sections (Barber et al. 2011; Fraser et al. 1987).
Our data contain the registered diagnosis linked to the C-section for a subsample of
births. These observations enable us to verify that the peaks in unplanned C-sections are
coupled with the use of more discretionary diagnoses.
C. Institutional Context
Finland has universal public health coverage. Comprehensive pre- and postnatal care
services are publicly provided. There are no private medical institutions running maternity wards. Consequently, all deliveries take place in public hospitals. All medical
expenses related to prenatal care, delivery, and postnatal care are fully covered by the
public healthcare system.
Pregnant women usually give birth in the nearest hospital. Only high-risk pregnancies
are systematically directed to a higher-level hospital for obstetric care and delivery.
Expectant women do not have pre-assigned midwives or physicians for the delivery.
Midwives take care of the delivery in all hospitals, while physicians have the ultimate
responsibility for obstetric care, decide on the type of delivery, and perform C-sections.
Physicians’ financial incentives to perform a C-section are negligible in Finland. The
total income of doctors working in public hospitals consists of basic salary (63 percent),
on-call and overtime payments (28 percent), personal supplements (for example, years
of service) (7 percent), and performance-based pay components (for example, fees per
appointment or procedure) (3 percent) (Finnish Medical Association 2016). The Csection rate (15.5 percent in 2015) is relatively low from an international perspective
(OECD 2017).
The regular working shifts for physicians are from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. from Monday to
Friday. The on-call hours for physicians may not exceed 24 hours during the regular
working week and last typically from 8 a.m. to 8 a.m. On weekends, the on-call hours for
physicians are from 8 a.m. to 9 a.m. on the next day.8 Midwives follow the same rotation
regardless of the type of day and work in three eight-hour shifts.9
While our data do not contain details about the organization of hospital resources
across different shifts, we have collected data on the aggregate number of midwives and
physicians by weekday and work shift for three different hospitals: two university
8. The head of the department in each hospital has large discretionary power to assign physicians to their
working schedules. However, physicians may often independently change their work shifts among themselves.
Physicians working in public hospitals are generally not unilaterally able to choose their working schedules.
Even though the statutes that govern on-call arrangements have changed in recent years, during most years
covered in our data, small hospitals with less than 1,000 annual births could autonomously decide their on-call
arrangements. In certain hospitals, physicians were allowed to be at home while on duty, if they could arrive to
the hospital within 30 minutes from home.
9. An example of midwives’schedules: (i) 7 a.m.–3 p.m., (ii) 2 p.m.–9.30 p.m., and (iii) 9.15 p.m.–7.15 a.m.
2054 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
hospitals and one small hospital. The qualitative evidence from these three hospitals,
described in Online Appendix Table A1, shows that staff availability does not vary
between working days.
III. Data and Methods
A. Data
The two main data sources used in our analysis are the Finnish Medical Birth Register
and the Hospital Discharge Register. The Finnish Medical Birth Register was established in 1987. This administrative data resource includes data on all live births and on
stillbirths of fetuses with a birth weight of at least 500 grams or with a gestational age of
at least 22 weeks. The register includes information on maternal background, healthcare
utilization, and medical interventions during pregnancy and delivery. It also includes
mothers’ diagnoses during delivery (ICD-10 codes) and newborn outcomes until the age
of seven days. From 1990, the register contains detailed information about the type of
C-section (scheduled vs. unscheduled). These data are collected at all delivery hospitals.10
We exclude from our sample planned C-sections and multiple pregnancies. For our
instrumental variable strategy, we focus only on first births.11 Our analysis sample
includes 392,560 deliveries that took place from 1990 to 2014. For the differences-indifferences analysis, we focus on both first and second births from families where the
first child was born by vaginal delivery (more details are provided in Section III.B.2).
The analysis sample consists of 645,292 children from 322,646 sibling pairs. There are
43 hospitals in our sample. Online Appendix Table A2 shows summary statistics for all
births in Finland between 1990 and 2014.
We match the Finnish Medical Birth Register to the Finnish Hospital Discharge
Register, which contains information about the diagnosed medical conditions, medical
operations, and the date of diagnoses. This hospital register contains all inpatient
consultations in Finland from 1990 to 2013. From 1998, the data include all outpatient
visits to hospitals. All diagnoses are coded using the International Classification of
Diseases (ICD) tool.12
We explore two sets of outcome variables. First, to test whether unplanned C-sections
have an impact on neonatal health, we analyze indicators of neonatal health included in
10. Home births are also included in the registry but are extremely rare in Finland. From 1996 to 2013, there
were 1,053,802 births in total, and only 197 were planned home deliveries (Ovaskainen et al. 2019). We focus
on births that took place in hospitals.
11. We follow a common practice in the literature and focus on first births, which also allows us to keep just one
birth per mother, and abstract from a potential source of correlation between the observations. First-time
mothers are also the group of mothers where we find larger variation. Given the faster pace of labor in higherorder births (NICE 2014) and the high risk of repeated C-section, there is less room for discretion in the decision
to perform an unplanned C-section in subsequent deliveries. Our results are qualitatively similar but less precise
when we include higher order births.
12. Diagnoses for years 1990–1995 are recorded using ICD-9 classification. Diagnoses from 1996 onwards are
recorded using ICD-10 classification. The quality and completeness of the Finnish Hospital Discharge Register
has been assessed in multiple validation studies that have compared recorded data entries with external
information. The completeness and accuracy of the data are found to be exceptionally high (Sund 2012). We
assess to what extent our data are able to identify the individuals with a certain diagnosis in the Results section.
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2055
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
the birth register. We study Apgar scores one minute after birth, admission to intensive
care unit (ICU), need of assisted ventilation, and early neonatal mortality (defined as
neonatal death in the first week of life).13 Second, we study longer-term outcomes
using detailed inpatient and outpatient diagnosis data from the Finnish Hospital
Discharge Register. We use primary diagnoses.14 To maintain a relatively large sample
size, we follow individuals from birth until age 15. We focus on the four metabolic and
immune-related conditions that have been most robustly associated with cesarean
delivery: asthma, atopic diseases (atopic dermatitis and allergic rhinitis), type 1 diabetes, and obesity. Online Appendix Table A3 provides more detail about each of these
diagnoses.
B. Empirical Strategy
We aim to estimate the impact of a cesarean delivery on child’s health at birth and older
ages. We define a binary variable CSi that takes value of one if the delivery is an
unplanned C-section and zero if it is a vaginal delivery. Thus, we aim to estimate the
following equation:
(1) Yi = b0 + b1CSi + X0
i b2 + dm + ky + /h +
R
i
‚
where Yi is the health outcome of infant i, Xi is a vector of covariates, and dm, ly, fh are
fixed effects for the month, year, and hospital of birth, respectively.15
The estimation of Equation 1 is, however, likely to provide biased estimates of b1
due to potential selection into cesarean birth.16 To study the causal effects of cesarean
delivery on children’s health, we exploit two different empirical strategies.
1. Instrumental variable strategy: Variation by time and type of day
Our instrumental variable strategy exploits the higher likelihood of being born by
unplanned C-section during the normal working shift on pre-leisure days compared to
regular working days. We use the interaction between the type of day and work shift as
an instrument for the mode of delivery.
Figure 1 presents the predicted probability of unplanned C-section delivery by hour
and type of day. We adjust for hospital, month, and year-of-birth fixed effects. Figure 1A
plots the distribution of C-sections over a 24-hour cycle for working days that precede a
13. Apgar scores result from the examination of the newborn by the midwife or pediatrician one minute after
the birth. Five different dimensions are measured and graded from 0 to 2: appearance (skin color), pulse (heart
rate), grimace (reflex irritability), activity (muscle tone), and respiration. The resulting score takes values from
1 to 10.
14. We replicated all our analysis using both primary and secondary diagnoses. All results remain unchanged.
Results are available upon request.
15. The vector of covariates includes parity, the gender of the baby, mother’s marital status, nationality,
socioeconomic status, age, and smoking status. In addition, we include pregnancy and delivery related indicators that include in vitro fertilization, gestational weeks, high (above 75th percentile) and low (below 25th
percentile) number of visits to prenatal clinic, induced labor, prostaglandin pre-induction, epidural use, and
laughing gas anesthesia.
16. Online Appendix Figure A1 shows that mothers and babies who undergo a C-section are very different
from those mothers and babies who undergo a vaginal delivery.
2056 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
Figure 1
Predicted Probability of Unplanned C-Section
Notes: Panel A presents the predicted probability of unplanned C-section by hour and type of day. Panel B
shows the predicted probability of unplanned C-section by shift and type of day. Both figures adjust for
hospital, month, and year-of-birth fixed effects. Pre-leisure days include working days that precede a Finnish
public holiday or a weekend, while working days include the rest of working days. Sample is restricted to
singleton first births that are either unscheduled C-sections or vaginal births.
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2057
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
leisure day compared to other working days.17 We find that substantially more Csections are performed during regular working hours on days that precede a leisure day
compared to the rest of working days. Figure 1B presents the predicted probability of
having an unplanned C-section by work shift and type of day. We find that the gap in Csection rates between a day that precedes a leisure day and the rest of working days
emerges only during the regular working hours (8 a.m.–4 p.m.).18
Importantly, we find that the excess C-sections performed on days that precede a
leisure day are not driven by advancing births that would have been cesarean deliveries
in any event. We do not observe any relative fall in C-sections during the evening hours
preceding a leisure day compared to the evenings of regular working days (Figure 1A)
or during the leisure day (Online Appendix Figure A2).19 These observations suggest
that physicians perform C-sections during the regular working hours on pre-leisure days
that would not have been performed otherwise.
The time pattern of C-sections is consistent with previous work by Brown (1996) and
Halla et al. (2020) that documents an increase in C-section rates on days that precede a
leisure day. Halla et al. (2020) exploit this variation in an instrumental variable framework
to study the impact of delivery mode on maternal fertility and labor supply. The existing
literature attributes the pre-leisure anomaly in the time pattern of C-sections to physicians’
leisure incentives that arise from the higher time cost and uncertainty of vaginal births. A
cesarean section takes on average 30–75 minutes and is perceived as a relatively easy
surgical intervention with low complication rates (NICE 2011). The average duration
of labor for first-time mothers who have a vaginal birth is 11 hours (NICE 2014).
We provide two pieces of complementary evidence to validate that the excess rate of
C-sections is not driven by medical factors. First, we build on previous evidence that
some medical diagnoses linked to a cesarean birth are more discretionary than others.
Dystocia (prolonged or obstructed labor), one of the most common indications for primary cesarean section, is believed to provide the greatest room for diagnostic discretion
(Fraser et al. 1987). The number of dystocia diagnoses has been shown to strongly
respond to physician incentives (Evans et al. 1984; Fraser et al. 1987; McCloskey, Petitti,
and Hobel 1992). We examine whether there is an excess number of dystocia diagnoses
during regular working hours on pre-leisure days. Our results (Online Appendix Table
A5) show that giving birth during the regular hours on a pre-leisure day increases the
probability of having a dystocia diagnosis compared to other working days. Importantly,
we do not find this temporal pattern for medical emergencies, for which there should not
17. Working days that precede a leisure day include Fridays and days preceding public holidays. Online
Appendix Table A4 documents all public holidays in Finland. Friday is not considered a working day that
precedes a leisure day if it is a holiday.
18. For our identification strategy we exploit only the variation presented in Figure 1B, that is, the excess Csections performed during normal working hours on pre-leisure days compared to other working days. Figure
1A shows, however, that within any working day there is also substantial variation in the C-section rate by the
time of birth. In particular, more cesareans are performed during normal working hours than during the rest of
the day, and we observe the lowest probability of cesarean delivery during the early morning (1 a.m.–7 a.m.).
This suggests that physicians try to concentrate most obstetric surgeries during their regular working shift. We
do not rely on this variation alone for identification.
19. Online Appendix Figure A2 compares the predicted probability of unplanned C-section by hour separately
for Saturdays or holidays (the leisure day following the pre-leisure day) and Sundays (a leisure day that is not
preceded by a working day). We do not see any relative drop in the C-section rate on Saturdays compared to
Sundays at any time of day.
2058 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
be any room for discretion. In particular, we find that our instrument does not predict
additional examinations of the fetus during labor, which doctors should perform if there
are any signs of fetal suffering.20
Our second piece of evidence builds on the literature showing that physician mothers
are less likely to receive C-sections driven by financial incentives (Johnson and Rehavi
2016). Consequently, we expect that the change in medical criteria during the normal
shift on pre-leisure days would not affect physician mothers and other medical professionals. Our results (Online Appendix Table A6) support this hypothesis. We do not
find that medical professionals have an increased risk of having a C-section during the
regular shift on pre-leisure days, while we do find this increase for mothers with an
equivalent level of education who are not employed in a medical profession.21
Overall, these pieces of evidence suggest that the observed increase in C-section rates
is supply-driven and consistent with the interpretation of previous studies that have
attributed similar increases to physicians’ leisure incentives (Brown 1996; Halla et al.
2020).
We exploit the variation in the probability of unplanned C-sections by time and type
of day and adopt an instrumental variable approach. We first estimate a standard twostage least squares (2SLS) with the following first stage:
(2) CSi = c0 + c1NSi + c2Preleisurei + c3NSi · Preleisurei + X0
i c4 + dm + ky + /h + ti
and the corresponding second stage:
(3) Yi = a0 + a1NSi + a2Preleisurei + a3CSci + X0
i a4 + dm + ky + /h + ei
where NSi is a dummy that takes a value one for births that take place during the normal
shift (8 a.m.–4 p.m.) and zero otherwise, and Preleisurei takes a value one for Fridays or
working days preceding a Finnish public holiday and zero for other working days, Xi is
the vector of individual controls,22 and dm, ly, fh are month, year, and hospital of birth
fixed effects, respectively. CSci in Equation 3 are the predicted C-sections from the first
stage. The interaction between regular working hours and a day preceding a leisure day
will serve as an instrument. As a result, we will be comparing mothers who give birth in
the same hospital during the same shift, but on different types of days (working days
preceding a leisure day or other working days).
20. We examine whether physicians take measurements of intrapartum or fetal scalp pH, which proxies the
oxygen saturation of fetal blood during labor.
21. Our definition of medical professionals includes physicians, midwives, and nurses. Our observation relates
to a large literature on physician-induced demand in healthcare. Since the work of Arrow (1963), it has been
recognized that asymmetric incentives between physicians and their patients are a central feature of the medical
marketplace. The role of financial incentives on the supply of cesarean sections has been documented by
Gruber and Owings (1996). Johnson and Rehavi (2016) observe that financial incentives have a particularly
large effect on the probability of having a cesarean section among nonmedical mothers. Our results complement the literature on physician-induced demand and show that the excess rate of C-section on pre-leisure days
is restricted to nonmedical professionals.
22. Gender of the baby, mother’s marital status, nationality, socioeconomic status, age, smoking status, and the
following pregnancy and delivery characteristics: gestational weeks and indicators for in vitro fertilization, high
(above 75th percentile) and low (below 25th percentile) number of visits to prenatal clinic, induced labor,
prostaglandin pre-induction, epidural use, and laughing gas anesthesia.
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2059
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
Our instrumental variables estimation needs to meet three conditions to yield valid
estimates. First, the instrument should strongly influence the probability of C-section
(first stage). Second, there should be no selection of mothers who give birth during the
regular shift on different types of days. Finally, being born during the regular shift on
pre-leisure days, compared to other working days, should only affect child outcomes
through the increased probability of being born by C-section (exclusion restriction).
Table 1 shows the results from the estimation of the first stage. Column 1 shows
the first-stage estimates including month, year, and hospital fixed effects. Column 2
includes a richer set of controls. These estimates show that being born during the normal
shift increases the probability of unplanned C-section for all working days. Moreover,
being born during the normal shift on pre-leisure days increases the probability of
unplanned C-section by 1.4 percentage points.23 This implies a 9.6 percent increase with
respect to the average unplanned C-section rate of 14.5 percent in our sample. This
estimate is in line with, but larger than, that by Halla et al. (2020), who document a 3.6
Table 1
First Stage
Unplanned C-Section
(1) (2)
Normal shift 0.015*** 0.017***
(0.001) (0.001)
Pre-leisure day 0.001 -0.002
(0.002) (0.002)
Normal shift · Pre-leisure 0.015*** 0.014***
(0.003) (0.003)
Observations 392,561 392,561
Controls No Yes
Mean of Y 0.145 0.145
First-stage F-statistic 26.650 25.209
Adjusted R2 0.008 0.070
Notes: This table shows estimates from the first stage (see Equation 2). All specifications include hospital,
year, and month-of-birth fixed effects. Controls: gender, maternal age, marital status, nationality, mother
occupation (long-term unemployed, high-skilled white collar, low-skilled white collar, manual worker,
student, other), whether mother smoked during pregnancy, high/low number of prenatal visits, IVF, gestation
weeks, induced labor, prostaglandin pre-induction, epidural or laughing gas anesthesia. Robust standard errors
in parentheses. Significance: *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01, standard p-values.
23. In Online Appendix Figure A3 we explore whether the strength of the first stage varies by type of hospital.
We do not find evidence that this variation is driven by any observable characteristic at the hospital level. The
first stage is very similar for hospitals of different sizes, for university and nonuniversity hospitals, for hospitals
with low and high C-section rate, and for hospitals in high and low populated locations.
2060 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
percent increase in C-sections on pre-leisure days, taking into account both planned and
unplanned cesareans. The first-stage F-statistics are larger than 25 in both specifications. Following the common critical values for weak instruments (Stock and Yogo
2005), we can reject the null hypothesis that the instrument is weak.
Figure 2 shows that our instrument does not predict a large set of maternal and pregnancy characteristics, including medical conditions that could predict a C-section. This
indicates that mothers giving birth during the regular shift on pre-leisure days compared
to other working days are similar in observable characteristics, suggesting that the observed increase in C-sections at these times cannot be explained by selection.24
Finally, regarding the exclusion restriction, we focus on births that take place on
working days, when hospital resources and quality of care should be constant. Moreover, to compromise our empirical strategy, any change in the quality of care would need
to happen on pre-leisure days only during the regular working hours. The information
about the organization of hospital staff discussed in Section II.C (Online Appendix
Table A1) suggests that this kind of change is unlikely in our setting, as there is no
evidence of differences in the distribution of hospital resources across shifts between
different types of working days.25 In Section V.A, we show that the planned activity in
the maternity wards during the regular shift is very similar on pre-leisure days compared
to the rest of working days and provide numerous supplementary analyses that further
reinforce the credibility of the exclusion restriction.
The 2SLS estimator enables us to identify a local average treatment effect (LATE).
This is the effect of C-sections for infants whose mothers’ mode of delivery is sensitive
to the subjective assessment of the physician. More accurately, we capture births where
the type of day affects the decision of the doctor to perform a C-section during the
normal shift. The counterfactual for these births is unlikely to be exclusively a cesarean
section later on, given that we do not find a relative drop in C-sections on pre-leisure
days after the normal shift or during the following day.
The LATE will not be informative of the effect of medically indicated C-sections, as
those will be performed regardless of physician’s incentives. Moreover, the LATE does
not capture the effect of unplanned C-sections for babies who had a very fast delivery,
leaving no room for physician discretion.
Our primary health outcomes and the endogenous variable are binary. Consequently,
besides the 2SLS models we estimate (recursive) bivariate probit models. These specifications mirror Equations 2 and 3 and assume that cesarean delivery (CSi) and the
binary indicator of health Yi are determined by the following latent indexes:
24. While, ideally, we would like to construct our instrument based on the time of admission to the hospital, this
information is not available in our data. One potential concern with using time of birth instead of time of
admission is that time of birth might be affected by the type of delivery, as C-sections shorten labor. This could
lead to compositional changes in the pool of mothers giving birth during the normal shift on different types of
days. However, the comparison of a vast list of maternal characteristics in Figure 2 shows that any such
compositional change does not appear to be quantitatively important in our context, as we do not find any
significant difference among mothers giving birth during the normal shift on pre-leisure days compared to other
working days. Moreover, Costa-Ramón et al. (2018) find that, in a similar context, using an instrument based on
the time of birth instead of the time of admission does not affect the results in practice.
25. It is important to note, however, that those numbers represent the current situation in a sample of hospitals
and may not necessarily be an accurate description of the situation in previous years.
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2061
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
(4) CSi = ‘[q1NSi + q2Preleisurei +q3NSi  Preleisurei + X0
i q4 + dm + ky +/h + mi > 0]
(5) Yi = ‘[p1NSi + p2Preleisurei + p3CSi + X0
i p4 + dm + ky + /h + ni > 0]
where (ni, xi) follow a bivariate standard normal distribution with unknown correlation.
These equations can be estimated through maximum likelihood. Identification in this
setting relies on the same assumptions that are needed to estimate the 2SLS model
together with an additional assumption about the joint normality of the error terms. In
the Results section we report marginal effects for both estimators.26 Online Appendix
Table A8 presents the first-stage results of the bivariate probit estimation, which show
very similar marginal effects to those from the linear model in Table 1.
Bivariate probit estimation is expected to present substantial advantages in the context
of this work, as it has been shown to be more efficient and less biased than 2SLS when
Figure 2
Instrument and Baseline Characteristics
Notes: The figure represents the coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval from separate regressions of each
predetermined variable (standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1) on the instrument (Normal shift * Preleisure), controlling for normal shift time, pre-leisure day, and hospital, year, and month-of-birth fixed effects. Sample is
restricted to singleton births that are either unscheduled C-sections or vaginal births that take place on working days.
26. Bivariate probit models estimate unconditional average causal effects. In contrast, 2SLS estimates the
LATE. However, in practice, the average causal effects produced by bivariate probit are likely to be similar to
2SLS estimates (Angrist and Pischke 2009).
2062 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
treatment and outcome probabilities are close to zero or one (Chiburis, Das, and Lokshin
2012; Bhattacharya, Goldman, and McCaffrey 2006; Nielsen, Smith, and Cxelikaksoy
2009). Given that we work in a low C-section rate setting and examine relatively rare
outcomes, we expect bivariate probit to outperform 2SLS in terms of efficiency. In the
Online Appendix we show, based on Monte Carlo simulations for our particular context,
that this is indeed the case. The results from this exercise reveal that, with a C-section
rate around 15 percent and having diseases with a prevalence equal or lower than 5
percent as outcomes, 2SLS results are largely uninformative due to their lack of precision. Bivariate probit results, in turn, are much more efficient, while being comparable
to 2SLS in terms of unbiasedness.
2. Differences-in-differences
Our second empirical strategy applies a differences-in-differences approach to a sample
of sibling pairs. We restrict the sample to families where the older sibling was born by
vaginal delivery and compare the health gap between siblings in families where the
second child was born by an unplanned C-section with families where the second child
was born by vaginal delivery. This enables us to control for all time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity at the family level and the effect of birth order. Our empirical
strategy builds on numerous studies that have used siblings fixed effects to estimate the
impact of health shocks while in utero or after birth (for example, Oreopoulos et al.
2008; Almond, Edlund, and Palme 2009; Almqvist et al. 2012; Aizer, Stroud, and Buka
2016) and extends the model to a differences-in-differences specification with family
fixed effects. Black et al. (2017) used a related approach to study the impact of child
disability on sibling outcomes.
We estimate the following equation:
(6) Yif =w0 + w1Secondbornif +w2Secondbornif ·CSif +X0
ifw3 +cf +dm +ky +/h +gif
where Yif is the health outcome of child i in family f, Secondbornif is a dummy variable
equal to one for the second child and zero for the first child, CSif is an indicator equal to
one for unplanned C-section and zero for vaginal delivery, Xif is a vector with the same
pregnancy and maternal controls of Equation 3, except for maternal characteristics that
are time-invariant, and diagnoses during pregnancy and delivery (like prolonged and
obstructed labor),27 gf, dm, ly, and fh are family, month, year, and hospital of birth fixed
effects, respectively.28 We cluster standard errors at the family level. Our parameter of
interest is c2, which identifies the change in the health gap between siblings in families
where the first child was born by vaginal delivery and the second child by C-section
compared to families where both children were born by vaginal delivery.
27. We do not include these diagnoses during labor as controls in the instrumental variables specification,
given that we find evidence that they can be an outcome of the time and type of day. The full list of controls is as
follows: gender of the child, maternal age, maternal smoking status, maternal weight, and indicators for high or
low number of prenatal visits, breech position, hospital visits during pregnancy due to eclampsia, hypertension
and placenta previa, abnormal glucose levels, gestational weeks, preterm pregnancy, induced birth, prostaglandin pre-induction, epidural, laughing gas anesthesia, and diagnoses of prolonged and obstructed labor.
28. We cannot estimate the baseline effects of the CSif indicator, which are absorbed by the interaction
Secondbornif ·CSif since by construction only second children have C-sections in our sample.
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2063
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
We do not include families whose older child was born by C-section for two reasons.
First, mothers who have a C-section in the first delivery and vaginal birth in the second
delivery are a very selected sample, given the very high probability of having a repeat Csection.29 Second, some studies find that having a C-section is associated with lower
fertility (Halla et al. 2020; Keag, Norman, and Stock 2018). We abstract from these
concerns by focusing on mothers whose first birth was a vaginal delivery.
Even though our rich data sources make it possible to control for a large set of
observable characteristics, it could be that there are sibling-specific unobservable differences that vary within family. In particular, younger siblings born by C-section could
be negatively selected compared to their vaginally delivered older siblings if the cesarean delivery is caused by complications, either during the pregnancy or delivery,
which we cannot observe in our data. These unobservable complications could cause
our estimates to be upwardly biased. Thus, our differences-in-differences estimates could
overestimate the impact of C-sections on the different diagnoses. In Section V.B, we
assess the magnitude of the potential bias and provide evidence that it is relatively small.
We will nonetheless keep the direction of this bias in mind when interpreting the results
from this strategy.
IV. Results
A. Neonatal Outcomes
We first estimate the impact of C-sections on neonatal outcomes. We study one-minute
Apgar scores, admission to the intensive care unit (ICU), assisted ventilation, and
neonatal (seven-day) mortality. Table 2 shows our ordinary least squares (OLS), 2SLS,
bivariate probit marginal effects, and differences-in-differences estimates. For each
estimation method, we report in square brackets Romano–Wolf p-values adjusted for
multiple hypothesis testing (Clarke, Romano, and Wolf 2020).30
We find that the OLS results replicate existing findings. Cesarean sections are associated with adverse outcomes at birth and higher neonatal mortality.31 Our 2SLS
estimates are not significant for any of the outcomes. However, the magnitude of
coefficients and large standard errors suggest that we cannot reject that there is a
(potentially large) effect on neonatal outcomes. As discussed in Section III.B.1, 2SLS
estimates are expected to be particularly uninformative with low treatment and outcome
probabilities.
Bivariate probit marginal effects are substantially more precisely estimated than the
2SLS coefficients, yet all point estimates from the bivariate probit models are within the
29. In 2010, The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) encouraged doctors to allow
women to opt for a vaginal delivery after a C-section, but the number of vaginal births after C-section has
remained low (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2010).
30. We perform this adjustment for each estimation method including both neonatal and long-run outcomes (all
12 outcome variables explored in Tables 2 and 3) using the RWOLF Stata package (Clarke 2016).
31. The OLS estimation is run in a sample that only excludes planned C-sections and births for which we do not
observe parity. The specification includes the full set of controls and fixed effects described in Equation 1, as
well as controls for birth order.
2064 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
confidence intervals of the 2SLS estimates. The bivariate probit results suggest that
unplanned C-sections increase the probability of having a low Apgar score (Apgar lower
than seven), being admitted to the intensive care unit, and receiving assisted ventilation.
The magnitudes of the bivariate probit marginal effect estimates are similar to OLS
estimates. However, we do not find significantly increased mortality risk within seven
Table 2
Neonatal Outcomes
Low
Apgar 1 ICU
Assisted
Ventilation
Neonatal
Mortality
(1) (2) (3) (4)
OLS 0.068*** 0.118*** 0.027*** 0.002***
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.000)
[0.002] [0.002] [0.002] [0.002]
Mean of Y 0.049 0.087 0.009 0.001
Observations 1,119,467 1,120,932 1,120,932 1,119,842
2SLS -0.018 -0.088 -0.006 0.006
(0.140) (0.170) (0.061) (0.023)
[1.000] [0.999] [1.000] [1.000]
Mean of Y 0.066 0.106 0.012 0.002
Observations 392,017 392,560 392,560 392,173
Bivariate probit 0.104*** 0.163*** 0.017*** -0.001
(0.008) (0.009) (0.005) (0.005)
[0.023] [0.001] [0.297] [0.927]
Mean of Y 0.066 0.106 0.012 0.002
Observations 392,017 392,560 392,560 392,173
Differences-in-differences 0.053*** 0.111*** 0.036*** 0.001
(0.007) (0.007) (0.004) (0.002)
[0.000] [0.000] [0.000] [0.919]
Mean of Y 0.038 0.070 0.006 0.001
Observations 644,551 645,292 645,292 644,746
First-stage F-statistic 24.996 25.216 25.216 26.007
Notes: This table shows the estimates of the marginal effect of an unplanned C-section on different neonatal
health indicators by OLS, 2SLS, bivariate probit, and differences-in-differences estimation (see Equations 1, 2,
3, and 6). Specifications as detailed in Section III.B, with the full set of fixed effects and controls. The sample
for bivariate probit and 2SLS includes only singleton first births; for differences-in-differences, the sample
includes both first and second singleton births from families where the first child is born by vaginal delivery
(and the second is born by vaginal delivery or unplanned C-section). The OLS estimation includes both first
and higher order singleton births. Robust standard errors (in parentheses) in first three panels, and standard
errors clustered at the family level in the differences-in-differences panel. First-stage F-statistic from 2SLS and
bivariate probit specifications. Significance: *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01, standard p-values. Romano–
Wolf multiple hypothesis adjusted p-values in square brackets.
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2065
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
days after birth. The results from the differences-in-differences models give support to
these findings with similarly sized and more precise coefficients. Overall, our results
suggest that unplanned C-sections have a negative impact on neonatal health. However, these adverse effects do not translate into a higher probability of early neonatal
mortality.
B. Later Child Health
We now turn to the long-run effects of C-sections on health outcomes. Table 3 shows
the OLS, 2SLS, bivariate probit, and differences-in-differences marginal effect estimates at ages five and ten. We analyze health conditions that have been extensively
documented in the literature as being positively associated with cesarean deliveries:
type 1 diabetes, obesity, asthma, and other atopic diseases (atopic dermatitis and allergic
rhinitis). Romano–Wolf p-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing are reported
in square brackets (Clarke, Romano, andWolf 2020).We will show year-by-year bivariate
probit and differences-in-differences estimates up to age 15 in Figures 4 and 5,
respectively. Online Appendix Figure A4 shows OLS estimates. Given that we study
health outcomes for children who are born from 1990 to 2014, the sample size
decreases as we consider older ages.
1. OLS results
The OLS estimates (Table 3 and Online Appendix Figure A4) suggest that cesarean
sections are associated with a higher probability of asthma, obesity, and atopic diseases.
These findings are consistent with existing studies that have documented significant
associations between cesarean sections and metabolic and immune-related conditions.
However, we do not detect that C-sections are associated with a higher probability of a
type 1 diabetes diagnosis.
To compare our findings with the results from previous studies, we repeat in Figure
3 the OLS estimation for the probability of having each disease by age five and show
how the coefficient changes as we vary the set of included controls. We reviewed the
literature on the relation between cesarean delivery and these diseases and for each
outcome made a list of the most common control variables.32 In these regressions, we
include all C-sections (planned and unplanned), given that most studies are not able
to control for this.33
The first coefficient in each panel of Figure 3 shows the estimate when no additional
covariates are included in the regression. We then start to cumulatively add sets of
controls. First, we add those included in at least 50 percent of the reviewed papers,
followed by those included in at least 20 percent of them (see Online Appendix Table A9
for a detailed list). In the next specification, we add the rest of the variables included in
32. We reviewed all the papers cited in the following meta-analyses: Bager, Wohlfahrt, and Westergaard
(2008); Cardwell et al. (2008); Darabi et al. (2019); Keag, Norman, and Stock (2018); Li, Zhou, and Liu (2013);
and Thavagnanam et al. (2008). Online Appendix Table A9 provides a full list of all papers reviewed for each
outcome.
33. In Online Appendix Figure A5 we show the number of papers that report the type of C-sections included.
Out of 85 papers, 58 include all types of C-sections or do not report which group they include.
2066 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
Table 3
Child Diagnoses by Age
Type 1 Diabetes Asthma Obesity Atopy
By Age: 5 10 5 10 5 10 5 10OLS 0.000 0.000 0.007*** 0.010*** 0.000*** 0.002*** 0.002** 0.004***
(0.000) (0.000) (0.001) (0.001) (0.000) (0.000) (0.001) (0.001)[0.585] [0.361] [0.002] [0.002] [0.008] [0.002] [0.042] [0.006]
Mean of Y 0.003 0.006 0.045 0.071 0.001 0.004 0.044 0.061Observations 807,035 556,009 807,035 556,009 807,035 556,009 807,035 556,0092SLS 0.089** 0.062 0.074 -0.121 0.001 0.000 0.022 0.110
(0.036) (0.044) (0.113) (0.139) (0.013) (0.034) (0.112) (0.127)[0.072] [0.786] [0.996] [0.990] [1.000] [1.000] [1.000] [0.990]
Mean of Y 0.003 0.006 0.040 0.070 0.001 0.004 0.041 0.058Observations 296,998 217,768 296,998 217,768 296,998 217,768 296,998 217,768Bivariate probit 0.003 0.003 0.031*** 0.015 0.001 0.003 -0.008 0.021
(0.002) (0.004) (0.009) (0.015) (0.001) (0.003) (0.010) (0.013)[0.504] [0.727] [0.005] [0.727] [0.572] [0.727] [0.727] [0.413]
Mean of Y 0.003 0.006 0.040 0.070 0.001 0.004 0.041 0.058Observations 296,998 217,768 296,998 217,768 296,998 217,768 296,998 217,768
(continued)
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2067
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
Table 3 (continued)
Type 1 Diabetes Asthma Obesity Atopy
By Age: 5 10 5 10 5 10 5 10Differences-in-differences -0.001 -0.001 0.014** 0.011 0.001 0.001 0.003 -0.001
(0.001) (0.003) (0.006) (0.009) (0.001) (0.002) (0.005) (0.007)[0.919] [0.933] [0.005] [0.287] [0.532] [0.933] [0.919] [0.933]
Mean of Y 0.003 0.006 0.045 0.070 0.001 0.004 0.044 0.060Observations 510,075 366,885 510,075 366,885 510,075 366,885 510,075 366,885First-stage F-statistic 25.725 29.546 25.725 29.546 25.725 29.546 25.725 29.546
Notes: This table shows the estimates of the effect of an unplanned C-section on the probability of the child having each diagnosis by age by OLS, 2SLS, bivariate probit(marginal effects), and differences-in-differences estimation (see Equations 1, 2, 3, and 6). Specifications as detailed in Section III.B, with the full set of fixed effects andcontrols. The sample for bivariate probit and 2SLS includes only singleton first births; for differences-in-differences, both first and second singleton births from families wherethe first child is born by vaginal delivery (and the second is born by vaginal delivery or unplanned C-section). The OLS estimation includes both first and higher order singletonbirths. Robust standard errors (in parentheses) in the first three panels, and standard errors clustered at the family level in the differences-in-differences panel. First-stage Fstatistic from 2SLS specifications. Significance: *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01, standard p-values. Romano–Wolf multiple hypothesis adjusted p-values in square
brackets.
2068 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
Figure 3
OLS Estimation by Group of Controls
Notes: These figures plot the cesarean section coefficients and their 95 percent confidence interval from the
OLS estimation of the association between C-section and the probability of being diagnosed with asthma,
atopic diseases, type 1 diabetes, or obesity before age five. In each figure, each coefficient corresponds to a
different specification with varying sets of controls that are sequentially added: no controls ; the list of controls
included in at least 50 percent of medical studies; controls included in at least 20 percent of them (more
information in Online Appendix Table A9); the rest of maternal, pregnancy, and delivery characteristics
included in our usual group of controls (described in Section III.B); hospital fixed effects; year fixed effects,
month fixed effects; excluding planned C-sections, and finally including family fixed effects.
2069
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
Figure 3 (continued)
2070 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
our usual group of controls (described in Section III.B) that previous literature was not
taking into account.34 Finally, in the last five columns, we sequentially add hospital
fixed effects, year-of-birth fixed effects, month-of-birth fixed effects, we restrict the
analysis to unplanned C-sections, and we include family fixed effects.
The pattern of this figure points out that controlling for a richer set of observables, as
well as including fixed effects, does not significantly change the magnitude and sign of
the coefficients. Three types of controls, however, seem to have a somewhat larger effect
on the estimates. First, we see for most outcomes that estimates become smaller when
controlling for the more extensive list of covariates included in previous papers (the 20
percent list) compared to controlling for the shorter list of controls included in 50 percent
of them. A key difference between these two groups is that the 20 percent list includes
controls for whether the mother had been diagnosed, before the child’s birth, with that
particular disease. The second substantial difference in estimates arises when we restrict
the sample to exclude scheduled C-sections. Finally, estimates also become closer to
zero when family fixed effects, which control for unobserved family heterogeneity, are
included.
In any case, even with the richest set of controls, our main conclusion holds: Csections are strongly associated with an increased risk of being diagnosed with asthma,
obesity, and atopic diseases. Controlling for observable characteristics is not enough to
alter this finding. For type 1 diabetes we only see a significant association when the
smallest list of controls is included. This association vanishes as we include a stricter set
of controls and fixed effects. This reconciles the findings from our OLS model in Online
Appendix Figure A4 with the results from previous literature.
2. Instrumental variables results
The 2SLS results suggest that unplanned C-sections increase the probability of having a
type 1 diabetes diagnosis before age five, even though the effect is not significant by age
ten. The effect size of the estimate is large, but very imprecise. Our results suggest a nine
percentage point increase in the probability of type 1 diabetes, but are consistent with an
increase ranging from 6.3 to 12.5 percentage points. The 2SLS estimates for asthma are
not significant. However, the lack of precision does not enable us to rule out even very
large (positive or negative) effects. For instance, the estimates by age five suggest that
the impact of C-sections may range from -4.2 percentage points to 18.4 percentage
points. Finally, the 2SLS estimates for obesity and atopic diseases are not significant, but
also too imprecise to rule out very large effects.
Similarly to our results for neonatal outcomes, the bivariate probit estimates (marginal
effects) are substantially more precisely estimated than the 2SLS coefficients. Yet,
practically all point estimates from the bivariate probit models are within the confidence
intervals of the 2SLS estimates. For type 1 diabetes, the marginal effect is much smaller
than the coefficient from the linear model and not significant. For asthma, the results
suggest a significant increase in the probability of a diagnosis by age five of 0.031 (95
percent confidence interval 0.022–0.04). Even though estimates are noisier and no
34. The additional covariates included in our set of controls but not in most previous papers are: mother marital
status, high or low number of visits to prenatal clinic during pregnancy, in vitro fertilization, epidural use,
laughing gas anesthesia, induced labor, and prostaglandin pre-induction.
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2071
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
longer significant by age ten, the results in Figure 4 show that unplanned C-sections
significantly increase the probability of an asthma diagnosis for children as young
as two years old. The effect is statistically significant up to age nine. For obesity, the
bivariate probit results are precisely estimated at zero at age five (0.001, 95 percent
confidence interval 0.000–0.002) and age ten (0.003, 95 percent confidence interval
0.000–0.006). However, the results in Figure 4 show a statistically detectable effect
from age 11. Finally, we do not find a significant impact on atopic diseases at age five
or ten.
3. Differences-in-differences results
The differences-in-differences results are very similar to the bivariate probit results. We
find that the second-born child has substantially greater risk of having an asthma diagnosis by age five than the firstborn child in families where the second child is born by
C-section. Similarly to the bivariate probit estimates, Figure 5 shows that this effect is
significant from ages one to eight. Despite the fact that our differences-in-differences
estimates could be upwardly biased (Section III.B.2), we do not find any significant
effects on obesity, atopic diseases, or type 1 diabetes. These results reinforce the conclusion that C-sections do not have impact on these outcomes.
Figure 4
Bivariate Probit Estimation—Child Diagnoses by Age
Notes: The figure plots the marginal effects from the bivariate probit estimation of the effect of unplanned C-section on
the probability of each diagnosis by age, with our usual specification. All regressions include hospital, year, and monthof-birth fixed effects and the full set of controls as described in Section III.B.1.
2072 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
4. Overview of results
Overall, our results suggest that unplanned C-sections increase the probability of suffering from asthma during childhood. The magnitude of this effect differs slightly
depending on the estimation method. The bivariate probit estimates indicate a slightly
larger but more imprecisely estimated impact (around two percentage points on average
for ages five to ten) than the estimates based on differences-in-differences analysis (1.3
percentage points). By comparing these estimates to the sample mean, we find that the
less precise bivariate probit estimates suggest a 36 percent increase in the probability of
having asthma diagnosis (compared to the sample mean of 5.5 percent over ages 5–10),
while the differences-in-differences estimates suggest a 21 percent increase (compared
to the sample mean of 5.8 percent). The latter is closer to the 20 percent increase in the
risk of asthma that is documented in recent meta-analyses (Thavagnanam et al. 2008;
Keag, Norman, and Stock 2018).
Our analysis indicates that C-sections do not increase the probability of type 1
diabetes or atopic diseases. For diabetes, we can rule out effects larger than 0.7 percentage points at age five using the bivariate probit model and larger than 0.1 percentage points using the differences-in-differences model. For atopic diseases, in turn,
our results discard effects larger than 1.2–1.3 percentage points with both methods.
Figure 5
Differences-in-Differences Analysis—Child Diagnoses by Age
Notes: The figure plots the coefficient of unplanned C-section for each diagnosis by age in family fixed effects models.
All regressions include family, hospital, year, and month-of-birth fixed effects and the full set of controls as described in
Section III.B.2.
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2073
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
Finally, bivariate probit results suggest there might be an effect of C-sections on
obesity after age 11. This observation is consistent with the evidence that puberty is a
vulnerable period for the development of overweight and obesity (Lobstein, Baur, and
Uauy 2004). However, our analysis is not conclusive in this regard because the results
from the differences-in-differences estimation do not corroborate this finding. For
younger ages, all methods suggest that there is no impact on obesity. For instance,
estimates at age five enable us to rule out effects larger than 0.3 percentage points.
One potential limitation of our analysis is that we study diagnoses made at inpatient or
outpatient visits to a hospital. For some outcomes, these diagnoses may be a good approximation to the true prevalence of the disease, while for other diseases hospital diagnoses may lead to underestimation. A previous study documents that in Finland practically
all new type 1 diabetes diagnoses are made in a hospital and listed in the Hospital
Discharge Register (Harjutsalo 2008). This evidence implies that we are able to observe
practically all type 1 diabetes diagnoses in our population of interest. However, since
1994, diagnoses for asthma in Finland are often made by general practitioners (Tuomisto
et al. 2010). Thus, we are likely to trace only the most severe cases of asthma. The same
might be true for atopic disease and obesity.35 In any case, an OLS estimation with the
control variables included in most existing studies, or even with a richer set of controls,
still yields a significant association of cesarean birth with these hospital diagnoses.
V. Validity Checks
A. Exclusion Restriction and Sensitivity Checks
Our instrumental variables strategy relies on the assumption that the interaction of regular
working hours and days that precede a weekend or public holiday affects health outcomes
only through its impact on the likelihood of cesarean sections. We argue that, in this
setting, this is likely to hold, since a violation would require other changes to happen on
days that precede a public holiday but only during the regular shift. In the following, we
provide several pieces of evidence that support the credibility of this assumption.
First, we show that, conditional on the type of birth, being born during the regular
working hours on pre-leisure days does not have any significant correlation with health
outcomes. Online Appendix Figure A6 shows the reduced-form relationship between
having an asthma diagnosis at different ages and the instrument, conditional on being
born by C-section (in the first panel) or being born by vaginal delivery (in the second
one). The fact that there is no significant reduced-form effect within type of birth is
consistent with the instrument being related to child health only through the increased
probability of C-section.
Second, we explore the overall activity at maternity wards across the different types
of days. The first panel of Online Appendix Figure A7 shows the proportion of planned
cesarean sections by time of birth and type of day. We find that scheduled activity is
organized very similarly during all working days. The same can be seen in the first
column of Table 4, where we regress an indicator for planned activity (equal to one
35. There is some evidence that, among children, ICD-coding underestimates the true prevalence of obesity.
ICD-coded cases have a higher BMI and higher healthcare utilization than those not coded (Kuhle et al. 2011).
2074 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
for planned C-section or induction) on our instrument and do not find evidence of any
significant difference. Moreover, we compare the number of births by type of day and
weekday (Online Appendix Figure A7, second panel) and do not find any evidence of
maternity ward crowding during the days that precede a public holiday.
Third, we explore the quality of care provided during different weekdays. The first
panel of Online Appendix Figure A8 shows that the probability of having a low Apgar
score (below 7) does not differ between weekdays or type of day, suggesting that the
quality of care during labor and delivery does not differ by type of day. The second panel
of Online Appendix Figure A8 shows the probability of early neonatal mortality, defined as death of a live-born baby within the first seven days of life, by weekday and type
of day. We expect that this measure would capture changes in the quality of care after
birth. We do not find evidence that early neonatal mortality is higher for babies born on
days that precede a public holiday compared to other weekdays. We further explore this
issue in Columns 2 and 3 in Table 4, where we analyze if during the normal shift on preleisure days the likelihood of suffering a medical negligence during childbirth is higher.
To proxy for this, we analyze if there is an increased risk of shoulder dystocia or brachial
Table 4
Exclusion Restriction Validity Checks
Planned
Birth
Shoulder
Dystocia
Brachial
Plexus
Injury
Length
of Stay
Maternal
Complications
Normal shift 0.130*** 0.000 -0.000** 0.031* 0.001*
(0.001) (0.000) (0.000) (0.018) (0.000)
Pre-leisure day 0.013*** 0.000 -0.000 0.022 0.000
(0.001) (0.000) (0.000) (0.024) (0.000)
Normal shift * Pre-leisure 0.001 -0.000* -0.000 0.005 -0.001*
(0.002) (0.000) (0.000) (0.037) (0.001)
Observations 1,095,943 1,095,943 1,095,943 53,633 392,560
Adjusted R2 0.083 0.003 0.002 0.225 0.009
Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Mean of Y 0.236 0.001 0.002 5.226 0.010
First-stage F-statistic 0.335 2.904 0.113 0.019 2.936
Notes: This table shows the results of regressing different proxy measures of quality of care on the instrument
(Normal shift * Pre-leisure), controlling for normal shift, pre-leisure day, hospital, year, and month-of-birth
fixed effects and the full set of controls as described in Equation 2. The outcome in Column 1 is a dummy equal
to one if the birth was planned (planned C-section or induction) and zero otherwise. In Column 2, the dependent
variable is a dummy for shoulder dystocia during childbirth, and in Column 3, a dummy for brachial plexus
injury. In Column 4, the dependent variable is mother’s length of stay (in days), and the sample is restricted to
mothers who delivered by C-section. Finally, in Column 5, the outcome is a dummy equal to one if the mother is
diagnosed with any complication related to the puerperium within one week from the delivery (ICD-10 Codes:
O85–O92). Here the sample is restricted to single births, unscheduled C-sections, and vaginal births that take
place on working days. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance: *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2075
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
plexus injury.36 We do not find any evidence that our instrument predicts either of these
outcomes, suggesting that the likelihood of medical negligence is not higher during the
regular shift on these types of days.
Additionally, we do not find that mothers who have a C-section during the normal
working hours on a day that precedes a public holiday have a longer length of stay than
mothers who have a C-section at other times. We explore this in Column 4 in Table 4,
where we regress mother’s length of stay on the instrument for the sample of mothers
who delivered by C-section. Finally, we explore in Column 5 if our instrument predicts a
higher risk of postpartum complications for the mother. This is an indicator equal to one
if, within one week after the delivery, the mother is diagnosed with any complication
related to the puerperium.37 We do not find any significant difference in this risk on preleisure days in general, and, during the normal shift in particular, the results suggest if
anything a reduction in complications. We interpret all these findings as evidence that
the quality of care remains constant across different types of working days during the
normal shift.
Fourth, since babies born on days that precede a public holiday or weekend stay in the
hospital during the following nonworking days, one could argue that their quality of
postnatal care is worse compared to children born on other working days. This would be
constant for both babies born during the regular shift and at other times and, hence,
would not necessarily compromise the exclusion restriction. Yet, we assess this concern.
Table 5 shows the marginal effects from bivariate probit regressions that restrict the
sample to babies born on Thursdays or Fridays.38 We find, despite the reduced sample
size, that the results from this estimation are consistent with our main results.
Finally, we report in Figure 2 that mothers who give birth during the regular working
hours on days that precede a public holiday do not have higher probability of having
induced labor. However, the induction of labor is likely to offer more room for discretionary behavior, in which case the decision to perform a C-section might be more
sensitive to physician’s subjective assessment.39 In other words, we expect that mothers
whose labor has been artificially induced are more likely to be part of the complier
population. Column 3 in Table 5 shows that our coefficients remain about the same if we
exclude mothers whose labor was induced from our sample. The same conclusion holds
if we exclude inductions from our differences-in-differences estimation. These results
suggest that our findings are not driven by mothers whose labor has been induced after
an admission to the maternity ward.
36. Shoulder dystocia is an obstetric emergency that is often unpredictable and is one of the most litigated
causes in obstetrics (Politi et al. 2010). This occurs when the baby’s head passes through the birth canal and
their shoulders become stuck during labor. If this complication arises, effective and timely clinical management
is essential to ensure the well-being of the newborn (Kwek and Yeo 2006). Brachial plexus injury is one of the
most important fetal complications of shoulder dystocia (Politi et al. 2010) and consists of an injury to the
brachial plexus, that is, the network of nerves that conducts signals from the spinal cord to the shoulder, arm,
and hand.
37. ICD-10 codes O85–O92.
38. The average length of stay in our sample is four days. The majority of babies born on Thursdays and
Fridays are hospitalized during the weekend.
39. This is despite the fact that recent evidence casts doubt on the commonly held belief that induction of labor
increases the risk for cesarean delivery. In particular, recent studies show that inductions at full term do not
increase the risk of cesarean delivery (Saccone and Berghella 2015) or even lower it (Mishanina et al. 2014),
with no increased risks for the mother and some benefits for the fetus.
2076 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
B. Differences-in-Differences Validity Checks
The results from our differences-in-differences model with family fixed effects could be
biased if there are unobservable characteristics correlated with the mode of delivery that
vary within family and across siblings. Under this scenario, this methodology would yield
upwardly-biased estimates. However, as shown in Section IV.B.3, our differences-indifferences results suggest that C-sections do not increase the risk of developing various
immune-mediated diseases that have previously been associated with cesarean births.
To assess the extent to which our results could be influenced by selection, we first run
a regression using birth weight as a placebo outcome, given that it cannot be affected
by unplanned C-sections. Table 5 shows that our differences-in-differences model
with family fixed effects does not predict birth weight. This result supports the validity
of this strategy: family fixed effects, jointly with the large set of controls, seem to be
taking into account general health differences between siblings born by C-section
and vaginal delivery.
Second, we compare our differences-in-differences estimates to those from other
samples of sibling pairs where we expect the second child to be negatively selected with
respect to their older sibling, but where none of them were born by C-section. These
samples include: (i) a sample of siblings where the first child is born by eutocic birth and
the second child is born either by eutocic or by instrumented birth and (ii) a sample of
siblings where the firstborn had a low-risk pregnancy and the second-born had either a
Table 5
Validity Checks
Birth Weight
Asthma at Age 5 for Sample
Thursdays
vs. Fridays
Excluding
Inductions
Bivariate probit 0.023 0.036***
(0.015) (0.010)
Mean of Y 0.040 0.039
Observations 117,826 246,933
Differences-in-differences -5.416 0.017**
(7.617) (0.007)
Mean of Y 3,566.117 0.044
Observations 645,134 440,291
Notes: Column 1 shows a placebo regression where the outcome is birth weight. Columns 2 and 3 gives the
results from the bivariate probit (top) and the differences-in-differences (bottom) estimation of the impact of
unplanned C-section on the probability of asthma diagnosis by age five restricting the sample to births taking
place on Thursdays or Fridays (Column 2) or to noninduced births (Column 3). Specifications are as detailed
in Sections III.B.1 and III.B.2, with the full set of fixed effects and controls. Robust standard errors (in
parentheses) for bivariate probit results, and standard errors clustered at the family level in the differences-indifferences panel. Significance: *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2077
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
Table 6
Validity of Differences-in-Differences
Neonatal Health Diagnosis by Age 5
Low
Apgar ICU
Assisted
Ventilation
Neonatal
Mortality
Type 1
Diabetes Asthma Obesity Atopy
Instrumented 0.060*** 0.020** 0.001 -0.001 -0.001 -0.004 -0.001 -0.006
(0.009) (0.009) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002) (0.008) (0.001) (0.009)
Mean of Y 0.028 0.061 0.005 0.001 0.003 0.044 0.001 0.044Observations 534,119 534,689 534,689 534,264 428,392 428392 428,392 428,392Risk pregnancy 0.001 0.016 0.003 0.001 -0.001 0.002 -0.000 0.005
(0.007) (0.010) (0.004) (0.002) (0.002) (0.009) (0.001) (0.009)
Mean of Y 0.035 0.062 0.005 0.001 0.003 0.044 0.001 0.044Observations 608,688 609,368 609,368 608,909 482,536 482,536 482,536 482,536
Notes: This table shows the results from sibling fixed effect models, following the specification in Equation 6, for two different samples of children: in the top panel, for asample of sibling pairs where the first child was born by eutocic birth, and the second child is born either by eutocic or instrumented vaginal birth; in the bottom panel, forvaginally delivered sibling pairs where the first child did not have a high-risk pregnancy and the second child had a low- or high-risk pregnancy. The top panel coefficientrepresents the change in the health gap between siblings in families where the second child was born by instrumented vaginal delivery, while the bottom panel coefficientrepresents the same for families where the second child had a high-risk pregnancy. All specifications include family, hospital, year, and month-of-birth fixed effects and thecontrols described in Section III.B.2. Standard errors are clustered at the family level. Significance: *p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.
2078 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
low- or a high-risk pregnancy, while all children in the sample were born by vaginal
delivery.40 Consequently, we assess the health gap between siblings across families that
had a complication during the second birth or during the second pregnancy, compared to
families where none of the siblings encountered any of these complications during
pregnancy or birth.
Table 6 shows our differences-in-differences estimates using these samples of siblings. The first four columns show that, compared to families where both siblings were
born by eutocic birth, second children born by instrumented vaginal delivery have worse
neonatal health than their older siblings who had an eutocic birth. We find a significantly
higher probability of having low Apgar scores and of being admitted to the ICU (top
panel). In the bottom panel, we can see that children who experienced a high-risk
pregnancy do not have significantly worse neonatal health by any of the indicators, even
though all coefficients have a positive sign. In the last four columns, we explore if
negative selection leading to instrumented birth or high-risk pregnancy is associated
with a higher probability of having any of the diagnoses we analyze in Section IV. We do
not find evidence that siblings born by instrumented vaginal delivery or those who had a
high-risk pregnancy have an increased risk of type 1 diabetes, asthma, atopic diseases, or
obesity at age five. These observations suggest that our differences-in-differences results for asthma are unlikely to be explained by negative selection.
C. Placebo Regressions
In this section, we perform a falsification test and compare the performance of the OLS
estimator with that of our instrumental variable strategy and differences-in-differences
model. In particular, we analyze, as a long-term placebo outcome, the probability that
the child has a diagnosis related to an injury, poisoning, or other consequences of
external causes at different ages.41 Results of this exercise can be found in Online
Appendix Figure A9. Using OLS, we find that C-sections are associated with an increased risk of the child suffering a hospital admission due to external causes. However,
as we would expect, we do not find a causal relationship between C-sections and these
diagnoses with either our instrumental variables or our differences-in-differences approach. This result reinforces the validity of both approaches to deal with omitted
variable bias when examining the impact of C-sections on children’s health.
VI. Conclusions
This work provides new evidence on the effects of avoidable cesarean
sections on various short- and long-term health outcomes. We use a novel instrumental
variable estimation strategy to overcome the potential endogeneity of birth mode and
40. A eutocic delivery is a vaginal delivery with no instrumentation. We define a high-risk pregnancy as a
pregnancy where the mother had at least one of these complications: a positive result in the glucose tolerance
test, a hospitalization during pregnancy due to blood loss, hypertension, eclampsia, or placenta previa. A lowrisk pregnancy is defined as the absence of these issues.
41. We exploit the ICD-10 category: Injury, poisoning, and certain other consequences of external causes,
ICD-10 Codes: S00–T98.
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2079
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
abstract from cases in which C-sections respond to a clear clinical indication. Our
empirical strategy builds on the finding that unplanned C-sections are more common
during regular working hours on Fridays and working days preceding public holidays.
We complement this empirical strategy by estimating a differences-in-differences
model with family fixed effects that compares the health gap between siblings in
families where the second child was born by unplanned C-section with the health gap
between siblings who were both born by vaginal delivery.
Our results suggest that C-sections have a substantial negative impact on neonatal
health. However, these adverse effects are not severe enough to translate into a higher
probability of increased neonatal mortality. Our long-run analysis follows children from
birth to age 15 and investigates the impact of C-sections on four health outcomes that
have been consistently associated with C-sections: type 1 diabetes, asthma, obesity, and
atopic diseases. In contrast to the OLS estimates, our instrumental variable and differencesin-differences estimates show that unplanned C-sections do not have a significant
effect on the probability of having a type 1 diabetes, obesity, or atopic disease diagnosis. However, we do find that being born by an unplanned C-section increases the
probability of having asthma. This effect is detectable from ages one and two and of
similar size to the associations reported by previous studies (Thavagnanam et al.
2008; Keag, Norman, and Stock 2018).
Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that mode of delivery can affect the
development of immune-related conditions, but suggest more nuanced effects of Csections than previous work. We try to reconcile our results with those in the literature,
and we find that controlling for the observable characteristics that most previous studies
were including is not enough to deal with the endogeneity of birth mode. We illustrate
the importance of such endogeneity by performing a placebo test and showing that, even
with a rich set of controls, OLS results suggest that children born by C-section are more
likely to suffer unrelated health problems, like external injuries. Both of our identification strategies, in turn, survive this falsification check and suggest that there is no
causal effect of cesarean sections on this placebo outcome.
We provide novel evidence on the long-term effects of unplanned C-sections that do
not respond to a clear medical indication, using inpatient and outpatient data for all
children born in Finland from 1990 to 2014. Although we are able to observe most of the
cases of type 1 diabetes, for some diagnoses (asthma, atopic disease, and obesity), we
might be only able to trace the most severe cases, given that these conditions are often
treated by general practitioners. Future work should focus on analyzing the impact of Csections on obesity and other metabolic disorders using primary-care data and anthropometric measurements.
We make use of the detailed diagnosis data to show that variation by time and type of
day can be a valid source of variation to investigate the impact of avoidable C-sections.
First, we show that mothers who give birth during regular working hours on pre-leisure
days are comparable in terms of an extensive list of pregnancy, health, and sociodemographic characteristics to mothers who give birth during these times on the rest of
working days. Second, we show that during the normal shift on these pre-leisure days,
physicians make greater use of more discretionary diagnoses as justification for the Csection. We also show that these additional C-sections are not performed on mothers
who work in a medical profession and whose mode of delivery has been shown by the
literature not to respond to doctors’ incentives (Johnson and Rehavi 2016).
2080 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
All in all, our results suggest that the additional C-sections performed during regular
working hours on pre-leisure days are not driven by medical factors. A simple back-ofthe envelope calculation can shed some light on the potential gains that could result from
reducing this practice. Being born during the normal shift on pre-leisure days increases
the probability of C-section by 1.4 percentage points.42 Given that the overall C-section
rate in Finland from 1990 to 2014 is 16.45 percent, removing these excess cesareans that
occur during pre-leisure days would lower the C-section rate by 1.86 percent.43 In 2014,
there were 9,534 C-sections in total (out of 57,323 deliveries). This implies that, in
absence of this practice, around 180 fewer C-sections would have been performed.
Taking into account that the cost of a C-section without complications is 1,815 euros
higher than that of a vaginal delivery,44 eliminating this variation would result in about
326,700 euros of savings in just one year.
We provide this evidence in the context of Finland, a country with one of the lowest Csection rates in the world (OECD 2017). We would expect this variation to provide an
even stronger source of identification in other countries with higher rates of medical
interventionism during childbirth. Thus, we hope this paper provides a solid base upon
which future research on the effects of avoidable cesarean sections can be built.
References
Aizer, Anna, Laura Stroud, and Stephen Buka. 2016. “Maternal Stress and Child Outcomes:
Evidence from Siblings.” Journal of Human Resources 51(3):523–55.
Almond, Douglas, Janet Currie, and Valentina Duque. 2018. “Childhood Circumstances and
Adult Outcomes: Act II.” Journal of Economic Literature 56(4):1360–446.
Almond, Douglas, Lena, Edlund and Mårten Palme. 2009. “Chernobyl’s Subclinical Legacy:
Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 124(4):1729–72.
Almqvist, C., S. Cnattingius, P. Lichtenstein, and C. Lundholm. 2012. “The Impact of Birth Mode
of Delivery on Childhood Asthma and Allergic Diseases—A Sibling Study.” Clinical &
Experimental Allergy 42(9):1369–76.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 2010. “ACOG Practice Bulletin 115:
Vaginal Birth after Previous Cesarean Delivery.” Obstetrics and Gynecology 116(2):450–63.
Angrist, Joshua, and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
Companion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1963. “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care.” American
Economic Review 53(5):941–73.
Bager, P., J. Wohlfahrt, and T. Westergaard. 2008. “Caesarean Delivery and Risk of Atopy and
Allergic Disease: Meta-Analyses.” Clinical & Experimental Allergy 38(4):634–42.
42. This is the first-stage coefficient in Column 2 in Table 1.
43. We divide the first stage by the C-section rate and multiply the result by the percentage of days that were
pre-leisure days in our sample (21.8 percent).
44. These prices are based on the diagnosis-related group (DRG) pricing used by hospitals for internal pricing
policies. We take the most recent price list in the largest hospital in Finland (Helsinki University Hospital). In
this hospital, the DRG product price for a C-section (without complications) is 4,020 euros and for a vaginal
delivery (without complications) 2,205 euros. The information can be found here (in Finnish, accessed on May
14, 2020): https://www.hus.fi/sites/default/files/2020-09/HUS%20Palveluhinnasto%202020%2C%20t[.]
0ja%20suoriteperusteiset%20hinnat%20%28osat%201%20ja%202%29.pdf
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2081
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
Barber, E.L., L.S. Lundsberg, K. Belanger, C.M. Pettker, E.F. Funai, and J.L. Illuzzi. 2011.
“Indications Contributing to the Increasing Cesarean Delivery Rate.” Obstetrics and Gynecology 118(1):29–38.
Bentley, J.P., C.L. Roberts, J.R. Bowen, A.J. Martin, J.M. Morris, and N. Nassar. 2016. “Planned
Birth before 39 Weeks and Child Development: A Population-Based Study.” Pediatrics
138(6):e20162002–e20162002.
Bhattacharya, Jay, Dana Goldman, and Daniel McCaffrey. 2006. “Estimating Probit Models with
Self-Selected Treatments.” Statistics in Medicine 25(3):389–413.
Black, Sandra E., Sanni Breining, David N. Figlio, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik,
Helena Skyt Nielsen, Jeffrey Roth, and Marianne Simonsen. 2017. “Sibling Spillovers.” NBER
Working Paper 23062. Cambridge, MA: NBER.
Blustein, Jan, and Jianmeng Liu. 2015. “Time to Consider the Risks of Caesarean Delivery for
Long Term Child Health.” BMJ 350:h2410.
Boerma, Ties, Carine Ronsmans, Dessalegn Y. Melesse, Aluisio J.D. Barros, Fernando C. Barros,
Liang Juan, Ann Beth Moller, Lale Say, Ahmad Reza Hosseinpoor, Mu Yi, Dácio de Lyra
Rabello Neto, and Marleen Temmerman. 2018. “Global Epidemiology of Use of and Disparities
in Caesarean Sections.” Lancet 392(10155):1341–48.
Brown, H. Shelton. 1996. “Physician Demand for Leisure: Implications for Cesarean Section
Rates.” Journal of Health Economics 15(2):233–42.
Card, David, Alessandra Fenizia, and David Silver. 2019. “The Impacts of Hospital Delivery
Practices on Infant Health.” NBER Working Paper 25986. Cambridge, MA: NBER.
Cardwell, C.R., L.C. Stene, G. Joner, O. Cinek, J. Svensson, M.J. Goldacre, R.C. Parslow, P.
Pozzilli, G. Brigis, D. Stoyanov, B. Urbonaité, S. Sipeti  c, E. Schober, C. Ionescu-Tirgoviste,
G. Devoti, C. E. de Beaufort, K. Buschard, and C.C. Patterson. 2008. “Caesarean Section Is
Associated with an Increased Risk of Childhood-Onset Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus: A MetaAnalysis of Observational Studies.” Diabetologia 51(5):726–35.
Chiburis, Richard C., Jishnu Das, and Michael Lokshin. 2012. “A Practical Comparison of the
Bivariate Probit and Linear IV Estimators.” Economics Letters 117(3):762–66.
Clarke, Damian. 2016. “RWOLF: Stata Module to Calculate Romano–Wolf Stepdown p-Values
for Multiple Hypothesis Testing.” Statistical Software Components S458276. Boston: Boston
College Department of Economics.
Clarke, D., J.P. Romano, and M. Wolf. 2020. “TheRomano–Wolf Multiple-Hypothesis Correction
in Stata.” Stata Journal 20(4):812–43.
Collado, Maria Carmen, Samuli Rautava, Erika Isolauri, and Seppo Salminen. 2015. “Gut
Microbiota: A Source of Novel Tools to Reduce the Risk of Human Disease?” Pediatric
Research 77:182–88.
Costa-Ramón, Ana María, Ana Rodríguez-González, Miquel Serra-Burriel, and Carlos CampilloArtero. 2018. “It’s about Time: Cesarean Sections and Neonatal Health.” Journal of Health
Economics 59:46–59.
Currie, Janet, and W. Bentley Macleod. 2017. “Diagnosing Expertise: Human Capital, Decision
Making, and Performance among Physicians.” Journal of Labor Economics 35(1):1–43.
Darabi, Behzad, Shoboo Rahmati, Mohammad Reza HafeziAhmadi, Gholamreza Badfar, and
Milad Azami. 2019. “The Association between Caesarean Section and Childhood Asthma:
An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology
15(1):62.
Dominguez-Bello, Maria G., Kassandra M. De Jesus-Laboy, Nan Shen, Laura M. Cox,
Amnon Amir, Antonio Gonzalez, Nicholas A. Bokulich, Se Jin Song, Juana I. Rivera-Vina,
Keimari Mendez, Rob Knight, and Jose C. Clemente. 2016. “Partial Restoration of the
Microbiota of Cesarean-Born Infants via Vaginal Microbial Transfer.” Nature Medicine
22(3):250–53.
2082 The Journal of Human Resources
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
Drucker, Aaron M., Annie R. Wang, Wen Qing Li, Erika Sevetson, Julie K. Block, and Abrar A.
Qureshi. 2017. “The Burden of Atopic Dermatitis: Summary of a Report for the National
Eczema Association.” Journal of Investigative Dermatology 137(1):26–30.
Evans, M.I., D.A. Richardson, J.S. Sholl, and B.A. Johnson. 1984. “Cesarean Section. Assessment
of the Convenience Factor.” Journal of Reproductive Medicine 29(9):670–76.
Finkelstein, E.A., W.C.K. Graham, and R. Malhotra. 2014. “Lifetime Direct Medical Costs of
Childhood Obesity.” Pediatrics 133(5):854–62.
Finnish Medical Association. 2016. “Physicians in Finland, Statistics on Physicians and the Health
Care System 2016.” Finnish Medical Association https://www.laakariliitto.fi/site/assets/files
/5223/ll16_tilasto2016_net1_170114.pdf (accessed April 14, 2022).
Fraser, William, Robert H. Usher, Frances H. McLean, Carol Bossenberry, Mary Ellen Thomson,
Michael S. Kramer, L. Paul Smith, and Hugh Power. 1987. “Temporal Variation in Rates of
Cesarean Section for Dystocia: Does ‘Convenience’ Play a Role?” American Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology 156(2):300–304.
Global Asthma Network. 2018. The Global Asthma Report 2018. Auckland, New Zealand: Global
Asthma Network.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Maria Owings. 1996. “Physician Financial Incentives and Cesarean Section
Delivery.” RAND Journal of Economics 27(1):99–123.
Halla, Martin, Harald Mayr, Gerald J. Pruckner, and Pilar Garcia-Gomez. 2020. “Cutting Fertility?
The Effect of Cesarean Deliveries on Subsequent Fertility and Maternal Labor Supply.” Journal
of Health Economics 72:102325.
Hannah, Mary E., Walter J. Hannah, Sheila A. Hewson, Ellen D. Hodnett, Saroj Saigal, Andrew R.
Willan, and Term Breech Trial Collaborative. 2000. “Planned Caesarean Section versus Planned
Vaginal Birth for Breech Presentation at Term: A Randomised Multicentre Trial.” Lancet
356(9239):1375–83.
Harjutsalo, V. 2008. “Time Trends in the Incidence of Type 1 Diabetes in Finnish Children:
A Cohort Study.” Lancet 371(9626):1777–82.
Hyde, Matthew James, and Neena Modi. 2012. “The Long-Term Effects of Birth by Caesarean
Section: The Case for a Randomised Controlled Trial.” Early Human Development 88(12):
943–49.
Hyde, Matthew J., Alison Mostyn, Neena Modi, and Paul R. Kemp. 2012. “The Health Implications of Birth by Caesarean section.” Biological Reviews 87(1):229–43.
Jachetta, Christine. 2015. “Cesarean Sections and Later Health Outcomes.” Unpublished.
Jensen, Vibeke Myrup, and Miriam Wüst. 2015. “Can Caesarean Section Improve Child
and Maternal Health? The Case of Breech Babies.” Journal of Health Economics 39:
289–302.
Johnson, Erin M., and M. Marit Rehavi. 2016. “Physicians Treating Physicians: Information
and Incentives in Childbirth.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8(1):115–41.
Keag, Oonagh E., Jane E. Norman, and Sarah J. Stock. 2018. “Long-Term Risks and Benefits
Associated with Cesarean Delivery for Mother, Baby, and Subsequent Pregnancies: Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis.” PLOS Medicine 15(1):1–22.
Kuhle, Stefan, Sara F.L. Kirk, Arto Ohinmaa, and Paul J. Veugelers. 2011. “Comparison of ICD
Code-Based Diagnosis of Obesity with Measured Obesity in Children and the Implications
for Health Care Cost Estimates.” BMC Medical Research Methodology 11:173.
Kwek, Kenneth, and George S.H. Yeo. 2006. “Shoulder Dystocia and Injuries: Prevention and
Management.” Current Opinion in Obstetrics and Gynecology 18(2):123–28.
Li, H.T., Y.B. Zhou, and J.M. Liu. 2013. “The Impact of Cesarean Section on Offspring Overweight and Obesity: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” International Journal of
Obesity 37(7):893–99.
Lobstein, T., L. Baur, and R. Uauy. 2004. “Obesity in Children and Young People: A Crisis in
Public Health.” Obesity Reviews 5(S1):4–85.
Costa-Ramón, Kortelainen, Rodríguez-González, and Sääksvuori 2083
by guest on August 20, 2026. Copyright 2020 Downloaded from 
McCloskey, L., D.B. Petitti, and C. J. Hobel. 1992. “Variations in the Use of Cesarean Delivery
for Dystocia: Lessons about the Source of Care.” Medical Care 30(2):126–135.
Mishanina, Ekaterina, Ewelina Rogozinska, Tej Thatthi, Rehan Uddin-Khan, Khalid S. Khan, and
Catherine Meads. 2014. “Use of Labour Induction and Risk of Cesarean Delivery: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis.” Canadian Medical Association Journal 186(9):665–73.
Mühlrad, Hanna. 2017. “Cesarean Section for High-Risk Births: Short Term Consequences for
Breech Births.” Unpublished.
Neu, Josef, and Jona Rushing. 2011. “Cesarean Versus Vaginal Delivery: Long-Term Infant
Outcomes and the Hygiene Hypothesis.” Clinics in Perinatology 38(2):321–31.
NICE. 2011. “Cesarean Section.” National Institute for Health and Care Excellence NICE Clinical
Guideline CG190. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg132/chapter/1-guidance (accessed
April 14, 2022).
———. 2014. “Intrapartum Care for Healthy Women and Babies.” National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence NICE Guideline CG190.
Nielsen, Helena Skyt, Nina Smith, and Aycan Cxelikaksoy. 2009. “The Effect of Marriage on
Education of Immigrants: Evidence from a Policy reform Restricting Marriage Migration.”
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 111(3):457–86.
OECD. 2013. Health at a Glance 2013: OECD Indicators. Paris: OECD Publishing.
———. 2017. Health at a Glance 2017: OECD Indicators. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Oreopoulos, P., M. Stabile, R. Walld, and L.L. Roos. 2008. “Short-, Medium-, and Long-Term
Consequences of Poor Infant Health: An Analysis Using Siblings and Twins.” Journal of
Human Resources 43:88–138.
Ovaskainen, Katja, Riitta Ojala, Kati Tihtonen, Mika Gissler, Tiina Luukkaala, and Outi
Tammela. 2019. “Planned Home Deliveries in Finland, 1996-2013.” Journal of Perinatology
39(2):220–28.
Peters, Lilian L., Charlene Thornton, Ank de Jonge, Ali Khashan, Mark Tracy, Soo Downe, Esther
I. Feijen-de Jong, and Hannah G. Dahlen. 2018. “The Effect of Medical and Operative Birth
Interventions on Child Health Outcomes in the First 28 Days and up to 5 Years of Age: A Linked
Data Population-Based Cohort Study.” Birth 45(4):347–357.
Politi, Salvatore, Laura D’emidio, Pietro Cignini, Maurizio Giorlandino, and Claudio Giorlandino. 2010. “Shoulder Dystocia: An Evidence-Based Approach.” Journal of Prenatal Medicine
4(3):35–42.
Prior, Emily, Shalini Santhakumaran, Chris Gale, Lara H. Philipps, Neena Modi, and Matthew J.
Hyde. 2012. “Breastfeeding after Cesarean Delivery: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
of World Literature.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 95(5):1113–35.
Reed, Shelby D., Todd A. Lee, and Douglas C. McCrory. 2004. “The Economic Burden of
Allergic Rhinitis.” PharmacoEconomics 22(6):345–361.
Sa