
NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE HEALTH IMPACTS OF HOSPITAL DELIVERY PRACTICES
David Card
Alessandra Fenizia
David Silver
Working Paper 25986
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25986
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2019, Revised November 2020
We thank Pablo Muñoz and Alice Wu for exceptional research assistance, Pat Kline, Marit Rehavi,
and Chris Walters for many detailed comments, Diane Alexander and Matt Notowidigdo for serving
as discussants, Ciaran Phibbs for generous assistance with NICU classifications, and seminar participants
at UC Berkeley, UC Merced, UCLA, UCSB, Princeton, GWU, NBER Summer Institute (Children),
ASHEcon, and HERO for helpful comments and suggestions. We are also extremely grateful to Laura
Giuliano for conversations that led to this project. Our use of the data in this project is covered under
UC Berkeley Federal wide Assurance #00006252. Silver gratefully acknowledges funding from the
National Institute on Aging, Grant Number T32-AG000186. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2019 by David Card, Alessandra Fenizia, and David Silver. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Health Impacts of Hospital Delivery Practices
David Card, Alessandra Fenizia, and David Silver
NBER Working Paper No. 25986
June 2019, Revised November 2020 
JEL No. D22,I11,I18,J13
ABSTRACT
Treatment practices vary widely across hospitals, often with little connection to the medical needs
of patients. We assess impacts of these differences in childbirth, where there is broad interest in 
reducing cesarean deliveries. Using a distance-based design and data from half a million births, 
we find that infants delivered at hospitals with higher c-section rates are born in better shape, are 
less likely to be readmitted to the hospital, are exhibit suggestive evidence of improved survival. 
These benefits are driven by the avoidance of prolonged labors that pose serious risks to infant 
health. In contrast, we document that these infants are substantially more likely to return to the 
emergency department for respiratory-related problems in the year after birth, providing some of 
the first design-based evidence consistent with a large observational literature linking cesarean 
delivery to chronic reductions in respiratory health.
David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu
Alessandra Fenizia
Department of Economics 
2115 G Street NW
George Washington University
Washington, DC 20052
afenizia@econ.berkeley.edu
David Silver
Department of Economics
Princeton University
124 Julis Romo Rabinowitz
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
david.silver@princeton.edu
1 
Clinical practices governing the use of intensive treatments differ greatly across hospitals.1
Whether and how these differences translate into health outcomes is a key policy concern (e.g. Baicker 
et al. 2012). The traditional view is that supplier-induced treatments have little benefit for patients (e.g. 
Fisher et al. 2003), in part because they reflect wasteful management practices (Bloom et al. 2015). A 
recent influential study by Doyle et al. (2015), however, points to significant health benefits for older 
patients of being routed to a high-cost hospital. 
In the context of childbirth, the focus of our study, cesarean delivery rates vary tremendously 
across hospitals in the US, from 19 to 48% overall, and from 8 to 32% for women with low-risk 
pregnancies (Kozhimannil et al. 2014). Hospital-level differences of this magnitude have generated 
substantial public concern (Shah, 2017), given that cesarean deliveries tend to cost more than vaginal 
births (Podulka et al. 2011; Sakala et al. 2013), that a c-section usually precludes future vaginal births, 
and that cesarean deliveries are correlated with worse health outcomes of infants and mothers.2
In light of the available evidence and steeply rising shares of cesarean delivery across the globe 
(Boerma et al. 2018), numerous medical, governmental, and international organizations have issued 
guidelines intended to reduce cesarean delivery rates.
3 Many of these guidelines steer first-time 
mothers with no clinical indications for c-section (a group we term “low-risk first births” or LRFBs) 
away from hospitals with high cesarean rates.4
 
Judging by the correlational evidence, such policies have the potential to save resources and
improve health. There are at least two good reasons, however, to view this evidence with caution. 
First, the eventual mode of delivery for LRFBs is often the result of complications arising during labor, 
raising concerns of reverse causality.5 Second, hospital practices that lead to lower c-section rates – 
specifically difference in willingness to wait for labor to run its course -- have the potential to affect 
all LRFBs. The prolonged labors required to achieve higher rates of successful vaginal delivery may 
deprive fetuses of oxygen and subject the mother to additional stress, even for births ultimately 
1 See Romley et al. (2011) and Doyle et al. (2015) for analyses of hospital-specific spending and outcomes, Rysavy (2015) for a study of 
variation in treatment of pre-term infants, and Barnato et al. (2005) for an analysis of hospital-specific variation in the context of racial 
disparities in treatment of AMI. Skinner (2012) provides a review of the related literature on regional variation in intensity of care or 
spending; related contributions include Finkelstein et al. (2016) and Cutler et al. (2019).
2 Recent surveys include Hyde et al. (2012), Clark and Silver (2011), Gregory et al. (2012) and Goer et al. (2012). Online Appendix A 
presents an abbreviated summary of recent studies on health risks associated with c-section. 3 Organizations issuing these guidelines include the World Health Organization (WHO 1985, 2018), the American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG 2014), the US Department of Health and Human Services (Spong et al. 2012), the Joint 
Commission (2016), the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE 2011). 4 For example, administrators of the state health insurance exchange under the Affordable Care Act in California have threatened to 
exclude hospitals with high c-section rates among LRFBs from the exchange plan networks (Dembosky 2018). 5 For example, continuous cardiotocography (CTG) to monitor the fetal heart rate is nearly universal, as is monitoring of uterine 
contraction patterns during labor. Non-reassuring signs in these monitoring technologies are a leading reason for c-sections among 
LRFBs, despite a high rate of false positives (Morris 2013).
2 
delivered by c-section.6 Nevertheless, the benefits of vaginal birth, including the avoidance of major 
surgery, the potential for improved respiratory and immune system development of the infant, 
reduced risks for future deliveries, and maternal preferences, could outweigh these downside risks. 
Understanding these factors is critical for assessing the costs and benefits of alternative hospital 
delivery practices among the LRFB population. Yet, credible evidence in this domain is lacking. 
We attempt to fill this gap by assessing some of the main health impacts of delivery at higher 
versus lower c-section hospitals.7 The potential sorting of patients across hospitals is a key empirical 
challenge. Our research design uses the fact that mothers tend to deliver at the nearest hospital (e.g., 
Phibbs et al. 1993; Currie and MacLeod 2017). Building on McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse (1994), 
we classify hospitals into two groups based on their risk-adjusted average cesarean rate for LRFBs and 
use the relative distance from a mother's home zip code to the nearest high c-section (H) hospital 
versus the nearest low c-section (L) hospital as an instrumental variable for delivery at an H hospital. 
 We implement this design using a large California data set that combines hospital discharge 
records for mothers and newborns, birth certificate information, inpatient and outpatient records for 
infants in the year after birth, and parallel records for mothers in the year before birth. These data 
provide infant health measures for a large sample of LRFBs, as well as detailed information on 
maternal characteristics and predetermined risk factors. 
Two primary concerns arise in this design. The first is that patients who live nearer to highor low-intensity hospitals – or indeed to any hospital – may differ in terms of their underlying health 
(Hadley and Cunningham 2004). To address this concern, we extend the existing literature in two main 
ways. First, we control directly for the fraction of government-insured mothers in a mother’s home 
zip code (a good proxy for local income) and include Hospital Service Area (HSA) fixed effects to 
ensure that distance comparisons come only from mothers who live in similar neighborhoods within 
an HSA. We also hold constant a mothers’ access to care by controlling for the distance to any hospital. 
Second, we show that, conditional on the above-mentioned controls and other hospital characteristics 
(discussed below), relative distance to a high c-section hospital is uncorrelated with a long list of 
6 Indeed, among LRFBs, the tradeoff between longer labor and earlier cesarean delivery is contentious. See for example the 
commentary by Cohen et al. (2018), criticizing the new guidelines for labor management published by ACOG. 7 Two prospective RCTs of “active management of labor” interventions to reduce c-section rates (López-Zeno et al. 1992; Frigoletto 
et al. 1995) reached different conclusions about whether such programs had an effect on c-section rates. More recently, Gimovsky and 
Berghella (2016) implemented a small (N=78) RCT to extend labor for women with a prolonged second stage, which substantially 
reduced c-section rates. These studies were under-powered for studying subsequent health effects on mothers and infants. Although 
our design is relatively powerful for assessing infant health outcomes, it is underpowered for assessing many important but rare maternal 
outcomes, such as maternal death or infertility. We therefore focus on infant outcomes, though we present some analysis of maternal 
outcomes such as perineal lacerations.
3 
maternal and newborn characteristics that strongly predict infant health, including education, race, 
insurance status, prenatal care, maternal smoking, and infant birth weight. We also document the 
insensitivity of all our key results to including any, all, or none of these additional factors in our models. 
 The second concern is the possibility of “correlated beneficial care” (McClellan et al. 1994): 
i.e., differences in other hospital characteristics and practices that do not determine delivery mode 
but are correlated with H/L status, and independently affect health outcomes. We address this 
concern in three ways. First, we include controls for a set of key hospital characteristics thought to 
independently influence quality and health outcomes: the volume of deliveries, the presence of 
different levels of NICU’s, ownership of the hospital, and measures of the breastfeeding initiation 
rate. Second, we propose a simple falsification test examining breech presentation pregnancies, 
which in recent years are nearly always delivered by c-section. If H hospitals differ from L hospitals 
in ways that impact health outcomes independent of delivery mode, we expect those effects to 
manifest in the breech population, for whom delivery mode is not a function of their delivery 
hospital. We do not find evidence that this is the case. 
Third, to control for unobservable factors that affect specific health outcomes, we classify 
hospitals based on each of our 4 main infant health outcomes and augment our models with 
additional endogenous control variables specifying whether the delivery hospital has high or low 
average values of that outcome. As with H/L status, we develop a set of instrumental variables 
based on relative distance to high- versus low-outcome hospitals in each domain. Importantly, we 
find that controlling for these additional channels has almost no effect on the estimated impacts of 
hospital delivery practices. We conclude that our estimates are unlikely to be confounded by 
differences in hospital practices that do not determine the delivery mode. 
We begin our empirical analysis by documenting the first-stage relationship between the 
relative distance to H versus L hospitals, the probability of delivery at a high c-section (H) hospital, 
and the probability of cesarean delivery. We show that relative distance is strongly correlated with the 
choice of an H hospital and with the likelihood of cesarean delivery. The higher rate of cesarean 
deliveries among mothers who are closer to H hospitals is largely offset by reductions in vaginal births 
occurring a day or more after the mother’s admission to the hospital, as would be expected if 
physicians at these hospitals are referring mothers for c-section earlier in the labor process. 
We find that hospital compliers, who shift their deliveries from low to high c-section hospitals 
based on relative distance, have lower education than other mothers and are more likely to be covered 
by government insurance. Mothers who deliver by c-section when shifted to a high c-section hospital 
4 
– hospital and procedure compliers – have even lower average education and are even more likely to be 
covered by government insurance, suggesting that practice style differences have larger impacts on 
relatively disadvantaged patients.8
 Turning to an examination of impacts at birth, our IV estimates show that delivery at an H 
hospital is associated with a sizable reduction in the probability of a low (<7) 5-minute Apgar score – 
an outcome that is highly correlated with the risk of hospital readmission and death (Iliodometri et al. 
2014). This result appears to be driven by a reduction in vaginal deliveries after prolonged labor. We 
also find that the average length of hospital stays for newborns at H hospitals is similar to that at L 
hospitals, despite their higher rate of cesarean delivery, suggesting that improvements in health for 
some babies offset the negative impacts of cesarean delivery on others. For mothers, we find that 
delivery at H hospitals leads to a substantial reduction in the rates of perineal lacerations and other 
traumas. It also leads to a shorter average time between admission and birth but a longer average time 
from birth to discharge, with little net impact on overall length of stay, similar to the result for infants. 
Among our main infant health outcomes, we find that infants of complying mothers delivered 
at H hospitals have a higher probability of an ED visit in the year after birth. Consistent with 
observational studies documenting adverse respiratory development after c-section (Hyde et al. 2012),
the majority of these additional visits are attributable to respiratory-related diagnoses. Offsetting the 
impact on ED use, however, we find a lower probability of readmission to hospital, concentrated in 
the neonatal period (first 28 days). 
We also examine the effects of delivery practices on infant deaths. We find consistent 
indications that infant mortality rates are, if anything, lower at H hospitals, though the gap is 
insignificant in our richest specifications (p≈0.10). Taken together with our findings on Apgar scores 
and neonatal readmissions, we believe the evidence points toward a small but meaningful risk of 
adverse events after prolonged labor that is partially mitigated by delivery practices at H hospitals. 
As in other settings, the generalizability of our findings depends on whether the treatment 
effects associated with delivery at a high c-section hospital vary across infants. Using correlated 
random coefficient (CRC) models (Garen 1984; Heckman and Vytlacil 1998) that allow for 
heterogeneity with respect to characteristics of the infant and the local share of cesarean deliveries, as 
well as the unobserved component of mother’s preferences for hospitals, we find that the estimated 
8 In California over our sample period the MediCal system paid the same amount to hospitals for vaginal and cesarean delivery, so this 
finding is not driven by financial incentives to perform more cesareans on government-insured patients. See Alexander (2015) for a 
discussion of delivery mode choice and financial incentives under Medicaid in a national sample of births.
5 
average treatment effects in our CRC models are very close to the local average treatment effects from simpler 
IV models. We see a mixed pattern of “Roy-style” sorting with respect to different infant outcomes. 
Finally, we consider multi-channel models that include controls for whether the delivery 
hospital has high or low average values of each of 4 main infant health outcomes, treating the choice 
of type of hospital in each domain as endogenous. As noted, we find that adding these additional 
controls has almost no effect on the magnitude of the estimated impacts of hospital delivery practices. 
Taken as a whole, our evidence suggests that delivery practices at high c-section hospitals have 
benefits as well as costs for infant health outcomes, and that policies steering women toward low csection hospitals could increase the risk of rare but serious adverse outcomes for infants. Additionally, 
our estimates suggest that prolonged labor poses a risk to infant health, and that policies aimed at 
increasing the wait times until surgical intervention should take account of both the costs and benefits 
of longer labors. Since our research design manipulates hospital choice rather than delivery mode 
directly, however, and since we lack information on longer run health outcomes for infants or mothers, 
we cannot provide a comprehensive welfare analysis of cesarean delivery. 
We contribute to three strands of research. First is an important literature estimating the 
effects of hospital practices on patient health. We build directly on the work of McClellan, McNeil, 
and Newhouse (1994), Cutler (2007), and Chandra and Staiger (2007), who use distance-based designs 
to study treatment of heart attacks. In recent work, Doyle et al. (2015) leverage quasi-random 
assignment of ambulance companies to study the health outcomes of elderly Medicare patients with 
non-deferrable conditions routed to high-cost hospitals. Our paper extends this literature in two key 
ways. First, we study a domain – childbirth – where we know far less about the causal impacts of 
hospital practices than we do for the elderly, and where ambulance-based designs are infeasible. 
Second, and relatedly, we extend the classic distance-based design of McClellan et al. (1994) by 
developing an econometric framework that clarifies the identification strategy, and by showing how 
to evaluate its validity. Relative to prior work using distance-based designs, we focus on local variation 
in relative distance to hospitals (within Hospital Service Areas) and we directly address the problem 
of correlated beneficial care. We believe our empirical strategy offers a viable approach for evaluating 
the impacts of hospital practices in this and other non-emergency care settings. 
We also contribute to an emerging literature on the relationship between management and 
productivity in healthcare (e.g. Bloom et al. 2015). Our results suggest that the management of the 
timing of interventions (in our case, the timing of intrapartum c-sections) is an important factor in 
6 
their effectiveness: earlier interventions improve some outcomes (including readmission rates) in what 
would have become difficult labors, at the cost of additional c-sections and higher ED use by infants. 
Finally, we contribute to a growing economics literature on the consequences of treatment 
choices at delivery. Jensen and Wüst (2013) show that breech births benefit from c-section delivery. 
Jachetta (2014) uses malpractice premiums to instrument for area-level c-section rates and finds that 
cesarean delivery leads to higher incidence of asthma. Halla et al. (2020) document a fertility effect of 
cesarean delivery for Austrian mothers. Costa-Ramón et al. (2018) use arrival time at the hospital as 
an exogenous determinant of c-section rates and find that cesarean delivery leads to lower Apgar 
scores. Mühlrad (2019) studies a sharp policy change in Sweden that led to a large increase in c-section 
rates for breech presentation births and finds improvements in infant health but no significant effect 
on mothers’ health or future fertility. We quantify some of the main infant health effects of alternative 
hospital delivery practices while paying close attention to the issue of instrument validity and the 
possibility of multi-dimensional practice-style differences across hospitals. 
II. An Overview of C-Section and Our Modeling Approach
II.a. Hospital Practice Styles and Delivery Outcomes
Figure I gives a stylized representation of the pathways leading to c-section. The left branch shows 
the pathway for mothers with a planned (or scheduled) c-section. This includes women who have 
had a previous c-section, those with breech pregnancy or multiple fetuses, and those with risk factors
like obesity or eclampsia (Declercq et al. 2006). Their c-sections occur with no attempted labor, often 
several days before normal term. 
The right branch shows the pathway for mothers who reach normal term with no scheduled 
intervention. Typically, a mother-to-be shows signs of labor and is admitted to hospital where her
progress is monitored and pain relief and labor-augmenting medications are administered.9
 Barring 
other factors, a decision to perform c-section at hospital h is reached when labor time exceeds the 
threshold Th (which may vary with maternal characteristics and other information), resulting in an 
unscheduled or intrapartum c-section. Hospital practices vary widely over how long to allow labor to 
proceed (Kozhimannil et al. 2014), leading to wide variation in the probability of intrapartum csection. 
9 Declercq et al. (2006) report that that 76% of all U.S. mothers had epidural anesthesia during labor. Many practitioners believe this 
slows labor and makes c-section more likely, though the evidence is controversial – see Howell (2000) and Klein (2006). Reporting 
rates of epidural anesthesia appear to vary widely across hospitals in our sample and we do not attempt to control for this factor.
7 
 Given these two very different pathways, we focus on low-risk first births (LRFBs), eliminating 
twins, breech presentations, births to mothers younger than 18 or over 35, and five other risk factors.10
We classify hospitals as having high or low cesarean rates for LRFBs relative to other hospitals in the 
same regional health care market, and use a distance-based design to identify the causal effects of 
delivering at a high c-section hospital. We interpret risk-adjusted differences in c-section rates for 
LRFBs as reflecting differences in the hospital-specific threshold Th.
11 Several factors could play a role 
in this variation, including financial incentives (e.g. Gruber and Owings 1996), malpractice pressures 
(e.g. Dubay et al. 1999; Currie and MacLeod 2008; Amaral-Garcia et al. 2016), and differences in 
medical training (e.g. Epstein and Nicholson 2009). Rather than try to identify these factors, however, 
we take a data-driven approach and simply classify hospitals as H or L. 
II.b. Econometric Framework
Our econometric framework consists of linear models for the choice of a high c-section hospital by 
mother i (denoted by ), cesarean delivery ( ), and a health outcome for the infant ( ): 
!! = #" + ##%! + #$&! + '! (1)
(! = )" + )#%! + )$&! + *! (2)
+! = ," + ,#%! + ,$&! + -! (3)
In each case the explanatory variables include %!, a measure of the relative distance from the mother’s 
home to a low versus high c-section hospital, and &!, a vector of controls. Equations (1) and (2) are 
first-stage models for choice of hospital type and c-section delivery. Equation (3) is a reduced-form 
model for the effect of relative distance on health. 
 In this setting there are two possible IV estimators. The first is formed by dividing the reduced 
form effect of relative distance (,#) by the first stage effect on the type of hospital (##). This estimator 
scales the reduced form effect per additional delivery at H hospitals. The second IV estimator divides ,#
by the first stage effect of relative distance on the probability of c-section ()#), scaling the reduced 
form effect per additional c-section. 
10 We do not attempt to eliminate c-sections with no sign of labor since the classification depends on indicators of labor on the mother’s 
discharge record which are known to be under-reported (Henry et al. 1995). See the discussion in Section IV. 11 We present supporting evidence on the timing of birth relative to the day of arrival of the mother below. 
Hi Ci i y
8 
To clarify the interpretation of these estimators, consider a binary version of relative distance, 
%!
%, indicating whether a mother’s home is closer to a high c-section hospital or not.
12 Let !"! and
!#! represent indicators for whether mother i would choose an H hospital when %!
% = 0 or %!% = 1, 
and let ("! and (#! represent indicators for whether she would deliver by c-section. The potential 
responses to changes in %!
% are represented by the 4-tuple (!"!, !#!), (("!, (#!). For example, 
mothers with (!"!, !#!), (("!, (#!) = (0,1), (0,0) switch hospital types in response to distance but 
who always deliver vaginally (i.e., H-compliers/V always-takers). 
 We make three standard assumptions. First, we assume there are no H-defiers (i.e., !#! ≥
!"!). Second, we assume that distance has no direct effect on delivery mode, so (#! = ("! if !#! =
!"!.
13 Finally, we assume there are no H-complier/C-defiers, ruling out rank-reversals in treatment 
intensity for H compliers.14 Under these assumptions there are three subgroups of H-complying 
mothers: (1) those who switch from vaginal to cesarean delivery when closer to an H hospital (H&C 
compliers); (2) those who always deliver by cesarean (H complier/C always-taker); (3) those who always 
deliver vaginally (H complier/V always-taker). 
Let 4#(5), 4&(5), 4'(5) represent the population shares of these three groups for patients 
with &! = 5. Then, for a given x-group the first-stage effect of relative distance on the probability of 
delivery at an H hospital (i.e., ##) identifies 4#(5) + 4&(5) + 4'(5), and the first-stage effect on the 
probability of c-section (i.e., )#) identifies 4#(5). More generally, assuming that X consists of a set of 
dummies for mutually exclusive subgroups, the first-stage coefficients for the overall sample identify 
the average fractions of H compliers and H&C compliers across subgroups (see Online Appendix B).
 Next, let 6!(ℎ, 8, 9, 5) represent a potential health outcome that would be observed for birth 
i conditional on hospital type h, delivery mode c, relative distance z, and covariates x. We assume: 
6!(ℎ, 8, 9, 5) = 6!(ℎ, 8, 5)
i.e., the standard exclusion restriction that health does not depend on relative distance conditional on 
delivery mode, hospital type, and x. The treatment effects for the three subgroups of H-compliers are:
12 In our analysis below we focus on a continuous measure of relative distance. However, IV estimates using an indicator for being 
closer to a high c-section hospital than to a low c-section hospital are similar. 13 This rules out the possibility, for example, that being closer to the hospital affects the stage of labor at arrival, which in turn affects 
the probability of c-section. To address concerns about the role of travel time we include a measure of the mother’s distance to the 
nearest hospital of any type in all our models. 
14 Rank invariance is routinely assumed in the analysis of quantile treatment effects (e.g., Chernozhukov and Hansen 2005). Currie and 
MacLeod (2017) consider a setting where rank-reversal could be important. They document substantial heterogeneity in physician 
diagnostic ability, which could lead to rank reversals if better diagnosticians are concentrated at certain hospitals. Importantly, our lowrisk first birth sample excludes most of the higher-risk births considered by Currie and MacLeod (2017).
9 
:#(5) = ;[6!(1,1, 5) − 6!(0,0, 5)|!&(	8ABCDEFG]
:&(5) = ;[6!(0,1, 5) − 6!(1,1, 5)|!	8ABCDEFG/( − JK]
:'(5) = ;[6!(0,0, 5) − 6!(1,0, 5)|!	8ABCDEFG/L − JK]. 
Note that :#, the treatment effect for H&C compliers, combines the effects of a switch from vaginal 
to caesarean delivery and the effect of a shorter labor. For the other two groups delivery mode is fixed. 
For C-always-takers, however, the c-section may occur earlier in the labor if they deliver at an H 
hospital, leading to health benefits for this group. 
The reduced-form health effect for a given x-group is an estimate of 4#(5):#(5) +
4&(5):&(5) + 4'(5):'(5) which combines the probabilities of each complier group with their 
treatment effects. Scaling by the first-stage effect on the probability of delivery at an H hospital yields 
an estimate of the average treatment effect per H complier: 
[4#(5):#(5) + 4&(5):&(5) + 4'(5):'(5)]/[4#(5) + 4&(5) + 4'(5)] (4) 
Scaling by the first stage effect on the probability of C-section, on the other hand, yields an estimate 
of :#(5) + [4&(5):&(5) + 4'(5):'(5)]/4#(5). If there are no health effects on the C or V alwaystakers, this is an estimate of :#(5). Given the strong likelihood that practice differences affect the 
health of the always-takers (by reducing the time to c-section), we focus on estimates that scale by the 
fraction of births moved from L to H hospitals and interpret the IV estimate as a weighted average of 
effects for the 3 complier groups. 
 
II.c. Correlated Practices and Capacities 
A concern with the interpretation of IV estimates derived from our baseline model is that high 
c-section hospitals may have other differences in practices or capacities that contribute to the health 
of infants -- the issue of “correlated beneficial care” identified by McClelland et al. (1994). We address 
this concern in two ways. First, we directly control for four key hospital characteristics: the volume 
of deliveries, the presence and level of a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), ownership status, and 
the breastfeeding initiation rate at the hospital. We include the latter because we have no direct 
information of breastfeeding in our birth records, and there is evidence in the literature that mothers 
who deliver by cesarean are less likely to initiate breastfeeding (e.g., Hobbs et al. 2016).15 
15 To the extent that differences in breastfeeding initiation are caused by differences in c-section rates, they are an intermediate 
outcome (or “mediator”) and controlling for them may lead us to under-state the causal effects of delivering at an H hospital (see e.g., 
Rosenbaum 1984). To be conservative, however, we add these controls.
10 
Second, to control for unobservable factors that affect specific health outcomes, we develop a 
classification of hospitals based on a set of four health outcomes for infants born at the hospital, and 
add a set of endogenous control variables specifying whether the delivery hospital has high or low 
average values of each outcome. Specifically, we classify hospitals as having high or low average rates 
of: (1) ED visits in the year after birth; (2) readmission to hospital in the year after birth; (3) low 5-
minute Apgar scores; and (4) infant death. These variables control for arbitrary sources of unobserved 
heterogeneity that affect multiple dimensions of infant health, including differences in the quality of 
management (Bloom et al. 2015) and differences in the quality or training of hospital staff. To address 
the endogeneity of these hospital characteristics we follow the same steps as above to form a set of 
four instrumental variables based on relative distance to a high- versus low-outcome hospitals on each
domain. We then estimate models with a total of 5 endogenous hospital characteristics, including our 
primary variable of interest indicating high or low c-section rates among LRFBs. 
III. Data Sources, Sample Overview, Relative Distance Instrument
III.a. Data Sources
We use a linked cohort data set created by the California Office of Statewide Health Planning and 
Development (OSHPD) that combines patient discharge (PD) records, emergency department (ED) 
records, ambulatory surgery (AS) records, and vital statistics (VS) records for all in-hospital births 
between 2007 and 2011.16 Specifically, discharge records for the birth stay of the infant and mother 
are linked with birth certificate data, PD/ED/AS and VS records over the following year, and 
PD/ED/AS records for mothers in the year prior to birth. The resulting data set includes VS-based
information on the mother (e.g., education, race, weight, and prenatal care) and infant (gestation, 
birthweight, Apgar score), as well as PD-based information on diagnoses at delivery. Pre-birth 
PD/ED/AS records provide additional indicators of maternal health (such as the number of ED visits 
in the year prior to birth). The post-partum PD/ED/AS and VS records provide our main health 
outcomes (hospital and ED visits and infant death in the year after birth). 
 A limitation of these data is the absence of information on visits to physician offices, 
community clinics, and similar facilities. Thus, we miss health problems for infants or mothers that 
are treated in these settings rather than at hospitals or AS centers. And despite the relatively rich 
information from the birth stay records and the birth certificate, we also lack direct clinical information 
16 This is known as PDD/ED/AS/Linked Birth Cohort data and is available to researchers through OSHPD. See Online Appendix C 
for more information on the characteristics of the data and the derivation of our samples.
11 
on factors like whether a cesarean occurred after a trial of labor, leaving us to infer trials of labor from 
procedure and diagnosis codes following Henry et al. (1995).17 The offsetting benefit is that we have 
a relatively large sample size, allowing us to detect plausible-sized effects with an IV research design. 
III.b. Data Overview
Table I provides an overview of the characteristics of all 2.7 million births in California during our 5-
year sample window (column 1), all low-risk first births (column 2), and our analysis sample (column 
3). We define LRFBs as singleton non-breech first births delivered at 37+ weeks of gestation, 
corresponding to the two lowest risk groups in Robson’s (2001) classification. We further eliminate 
mothers under 18 or over 35 and those with any of 5 other risk factors: eclampsia, pre-eclampsia, 
growth restrictions, BMI >90th percentile, or >20 prenatal visits. We do not condition on other risk 
factors, allowing us to test for orthogonality of our instrument with indicators of infant health. 
 The entries in column 1 show that about 50% of all California mothers are Hispanic, one-half 
have no more than high school education, and one-half have their delivery paid by government 
insurance (mainly Medi-Cal, the state’s version of Medicaid). All three rates fall to around 40% among 
LRFB mothers. LRFB mothers are also younger and lighter. Overall about one third of all California 
births and one quarter of LRFBs were delivered by c-section during our sample period, similar to the 
national averages reported by Osterman and Martin (2014). 
III.c. Construction of Relative Distance Instrument
Our distance-based design relies on a prior classification of hospitals. To capture local variation in the 
hospital types available to an expecting mother and because c-section rates vary across regions of 
California (e.g. rates are much higher in Los Angeles than in the Bay Area), we elected to define high 
and low c-section hospitals within Health Referral Regions (HRRs).18 As detailed in Online Appendix 
C, we fit a logit model for cesarean delivery on our LRFB sample, including hospital dummies and a 
set of risk factors. We classify a hospital as “high c-section” (H) for mothers in a given HRR if its 
risk-adjusted c-section rate (i.e., the hospital effect in the logit) is above the patient-weighted mean for 
17 Johnson & Rehavi (2016) similarly use this classification method. Martin et al. (2013b) evaluate the quality of the medical and health 
data recorded on birth certificates and conclude that while some information (e.g. parity) is relatively accurate, other information (e.g., 
fetal intolerance of labor) is poorly recorded.
18 Hospital referral regions (HRRs) represent regional health care markets for tertiary medical care, defined by the Dartmouth Atlas. 
There are 25 HRRs in our sample of LRFBs. If we classified hospitals on a statewide basis, we would have many more high c-section 
hospitals in Southern and Central California and many more low c-section hospitals in Northern California. 
12 
all hospitals in that HRR. Otherwise it is classified as “low c-section” (L).19 We note that if a hospital 
serves mothers from two adjacent HRRs it may be classified as H for mothers in one HRR and L for 
those in the other, depending on c-section rates at other hospitals in the two HRRs. 
Online Appendix Table I shows that the average cesarean delivery rate of LRFBs is 29% at H 
hospitals and 22% at L hospitals. About two-thirds of the difference is attributable to a higher rate of 
c-sections that are performed in cases where there are no indications of a trial of labor (which, 
following the literature, we refer to as unscheduled c-sections hereafter).20 H hospitals are also more likely 
to be for-profit than L hospitals (18% vs. 9%) and less likely to have a NICU unit (74% vs. 86%), but 
have about the same average numbers of deliveries per year (3,695 versus 3,635). To address 
differences in health outcomes that may be attributed to observed hospital characteristics, in our 
models below we include controls for hospital ownership, type of NICU, and number of deliveries, 
as well as variables measuring breastfeeding initiation rates. 
 Given the hospital classifications, we then calculate the distance from the centroid of a 
patient’s home zip code to the centroid of the zip code of the nearest H hospital (M(!) and the nearest 
L hospital (M)!). We define relative distance %! ≡ M)! − M(! and an indicator for being closer to an 
H hospital %!
% = 1[%! ≥ 0]. We also define the distance to nearest hospital M!*+, = min[M)!, M(!]. 
 The third column of Table I presents the characteristics of the subsample of LRFBs that have 
non-missing patient zip code information, non-missing values for all the control variables in our main 
specifications, and have M(! ≤ 20 miles, M)! ≤ 20 miles, and less than 20 miles between the mother’s 
home zip code and actual hospital she delivered in. These restrictions eliminate about 20% of LRFBs, 
leaving our final analysis sample of 491,604 births. A comparison of columns 2 and 3 suggests that 
this sample is quite similar to the overall LRFB sample. 
 Figure II illustrates the strong relationship between relative distance and hospital choice for 
LRFB mothers. Here we plot the fraction of mothers in each zip code who deliver at an H hospital 
against the value of %! for mothers in that zip code. The data suggest a nearly symmetric S-curve 
19 One concern is that the estimated hospital logit coefficients models for c-section simply reflect unobservable case-mix differences. 
To probe whether our classification algorithm is biased by case-mix differences, we reclassified hospitals with various sets of riskadjusters. Reassuringly, the resulting classifications are all nearly perfectly correlated with our preferred classification, suggesting that 
case-mix differences, although likely present, are unlikely to significantly affect our results. 20 Our data do not contain a flag for scheduled vs unscheduled c-sections; therefore, we follow the existing literature (e.g., Gregory et 
al. 2002; Johnson and Rehavi 2016) and use the absence/presence of any sign of trial of labor as a proxy for scheduled/unscheduled 
c-sections. We classify c-sections with or without sign of labor based on the presence or absence of at least one of a set of ICD-9-CM 
diagnosis codes devised by Henry et al. (1995) that indicate dystocia or fetal distress during labor.
13 
relationship, tending toward a minimum of about 10% when %! < −15 and a maximum of about 
90% when %! > 15. 
III.d. Evaluating Instrument Validity
A concern with a distance-based IV strategy is that relative distance may be correlated with underlying 
determinants of patient health (e.g., Hadley and Cunningham 2004; Garabedian et al. 2014). To assess 
this concern, we estimated a series of OLS models for a set of observed maternal characteristics and 
infant risk factors, looking for evidence of a correlation with relative distance. Specifically, for each
risk factor we fit a model of the form: 
W! = X" + X#%! + X-&!
" + ζ. , (5)
where &!
" is a set of basic control variables we include in all our outcome models. This includes HSA 
effects, year effects, distance to the nearest hospital (M!
*+,), a set of 17 variables summarizing 4 key 
characteristics of the hospital of delivery (ownership, volume of deliveries, presence and type of 
neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), and breastfeeding initiation rates), and a simple measure of 
neighborhood economic status based on the fraction of all mothers (including first- and higher-parity 
births) from the same zip code who were covered by government insurance at their delivery. The last 
variable is included to control for the possibility that lower-income families are sorted within HSAs 
and are more likely to live near hospitals with higher (or lower) risk-adjusted c-section rates. 
 Results for 31 different maternal characteristics and risk factors are summarized in Table II. 
The list includes variables like mother’s age, insurance status, smoking behavior, use of prenatal care, 
the infant’s gestation and birth weight, and a set of characteristics of new mothers in the mother’s zip 
code – all variables that are correlated with infant health outcomes. 
 Column 1 reports estimates of the X# coefficients from this exercise, with standard errors 
clustered at the mother’s zip code in column 2. Controlling for HSA and the fraction of mothers in 
the same zip code with government insurance, mothers living closer to H or L hospitals are statistically 
indistinguishable from one another. Only 2 of the 31 estimated coefficients are near statistical 
significance: an indicator for late initiation of maternal care; and maternal asthma. To summarize the 
overall pattern of the differences in risk factors we fit logit models for 3 outcomes – an infant ED 
visit in the year after birth, an infant readmission to hospital, and infant death – using all 31 predictors 
in the table. As shown at the bottom of the table, we find no evidence that infants whose mothers live 
nearer to H hospitals have higher or lower predicted risks of these outcomes. Finally, we perform a 
14 
joint F-test of the null hypothesis that the coefficients on all 31 listed characteristics are jointly zero in 
a regression of relative distance on those characteristics and our baseline controls. The F-statistic from 
this test is 1.092 – close to its expected value under the null, with a p-value of 0.335.
21
For comparative purposes columns 3 and 4 show the estimated coefficients and standard 
errors from models of the relationship between the risk factors and actual delivery at a high c-section 
hospital (i.e., we replace %! in equation (5) with !!). Consistent with the motivation for an 
instrumental-variables approach in the first place, we observe significant evidence of sorting across 
hospital types. Conditional on our basic controls, mothers who deliver at H hospitals are more likely 
to have government insurance; have higher rates of visiting the hospital in the year before delivery; 
have higher rates of smoking during their pregnancy; and have infants that are more likely to be low 
birthweight (<2500g). On balance, it appears that infants delivered at H hospitals have worse health: 
predicted ED visits, inpatient readmissions and death rates are all significantly higher for these infants. 
In contrast, the results in columns 1 and 2 show that our approach of looking within HSAs 
and isolating choices based on the relative distance to H versus L hospitals overcomes this sorting. In 
the analysis below, however, we perform several additional checks to ascertain that our IV estimates 
remain stable as we add various controls. 
IV. First-Stage Relationships and Complier Characteristics
With this background, we turn to our first-stage models and a characterization of the compliers 
affected by relative distance. The first two rows of Table III present estimates of the first-stage effects 
of relative distance on the probabilities of giving birth in an H hospital and delivering by cesarean. 
We show 4 sets of estimates. The first two columns use the continuous version of relative distance 
(%!), with only our basic controls (&!
") or a full set of controls that includes all the variables in Table 
II (in some cases expanded to a set of dummies or a polynomial function). The third and fourth 
columns show analogous estimates using the binary version of our instrument (%!
%). 
The estimate of 1.304 in the first row of the first column means that a mother living 10 miles 
closer to an H-hospital is 13.04 percentage points (ppts) more likely to deliver at an H hospital 
(controlling for &!
"), while the 0.682 estimate in the third column means that a mother who lives closer 
21 Consistent with the concerns raised by Hadley and Cunningham (2004), there is some evidence of sorting at broader geographies. 
The F-test without conditioning on mother’s HSA rejects that these 31 characteristics are orthogonal to relative distance (with a p < 
0.001), highlighting the importance of comparing mothers who are served by the same hospital market for the validity of our distancebased design. We have also conducted this analysis excluding the 17 variables representing characteristics of the delivery hospital and 
reach the same conclusion (results available upon request).
15 
to an H hospital than to an L hospital is 6.82 ppts more likely to deliver at such a hospital. Both 
estimates are highly significant. We note that the t-statistic for the continuous version of relative 
distance (9.9) is large enough that a conventional t-test on a second stage coefficient has approximately 
correct size (Lee et al., 2020, Table 3). Consistent with the results in Table II, we also see that adding 
the extra controls has almost no effect on the estimates of the first stage effects. 
 Relative distance also has a strong effect on the probability of c-section delivery. A mother 
living 10 miles closer to an H hospital has a 1.59 ppt higher probability of c-section; a mother who is 
simply closer to an H-hospital than an L hospital has a 0.78 ppt higher probability of c-section. Again, 
these effects are virtually the same when we add the additional controls. 
 The third and fourth rows of Table III show the effects of relative distance on cesarean 
deliveries that occur with or without indications of labor. These estimates suggest that about threequarters of the extra c-sections attributable to living closer to an H hospital were unscheduled 
procedures (i.e., occurring after an attempt at labor). Since indicators of labor are known to be underreported on the mother’s discharge record, this is a lower bound on the share of c-sections after a trial 
of labor caused by the instrument. Indeed, the 16% under-reporting rate found by Henry et al. (1995) 
implies that at least half of the c-sections without signs of labor actually occurred after a trial of labor 
– i.e., that the vast majority of additional c-sections caused by distance-based selection of an H hospital 
occurred after a trial of labor.22 
The next rows of Table III show the estimated effects of relative distance on the probabilities 
of c-section and vaginal births on the day the mother arrived at the hospital versus 1 or more days 
later. (We do not have information on the hour of arrival or birth). Most of the extra c-sections for 
mothers who are closer to an H hospital occur on the day of arrival, while most of the reduction in 
vaginal deliveries is for births after a day or more in hospital. This pattern implies that practices at H 
hospitals tend to shift later vaginal births to earlier cesarean deliveries. 
 Next, we show estimates of the effect of relative distance on cesarean deliveries at H and L 
hospitals, respectively. Being closer to an H hospital leads to relatively large rise in the probability of 
delivery by c-section at an H hospital, offset by a reduction in c-sections at L hospitals. Under our 
22 Data from Henry et al. (1995) show that of 831 primary c-sections for non-breech births that were clinically coded as having trial of 
labor, 701 had indications of labor on the discharge record, implying a 15.6% under-reporting rate. If we assume that distance only 
affects c-section rates with signs of labor, we would expect to find that c-sections with no signs of labor account for 15.6% of the overall 
first stage effect. Martin et al. (2013b) report that "trial of labor" reported on the birth certificate under-reports actual trial of labor for 
cesarean delivered births by 12-25%.
16 
assumptions the latter effect is an estimate of the share of H-complier/C-ATs, who switch hospital 
types in response to relative distance but have a cesarean delivery regardless of where they present. 
 The bottom panel of the table shows the implied breakdowns of the H-complier population 
into its three constituent subgroups. To calculate these fractions using the continuous distance 
instrument we use the changes in probabilities associated with a 5-mile reduction in relative distance 
to an H hospital (which has about the same effect on the probability of H-delivery as simply being 
closer to an H-hospital). Both the continuous and binary versions of the instrument imply that H&C 
compliers represent 12% of the overall H complier population, while C-ATs represent about 19%, 
and V-ATs represent 69%. 
To further explore the effects of relative distance on hospital and delivery mode choice, we 
used the discrete version of our instrument to estimate the mean characteristics of the overall group 
of H-compliers and the subgroup of H&C compliers. The results are summarized in Table IV. A 
comparison of the demographic characteristics of all LRFB mothers (column 1) and the H-compliers 
(column 2) shows that the compliers are more likely to be Hispanic and to have at most a high school 
education. They are also more likely to have government insurance, much less likely to be enrolled in 
Kaiser (a large HMO with its own hospitals, most of which are classified as L), and to have visited an
ED in the year prior to birth.23 Consistent with evidence from other settings (e.g., Beckert et al.’s 
(2012) study of hip replacement) these comparisons suggest that less advantaged families are more
affected by distance. 
The H&C compliers (column 3) are even more highly selected. For example, only about 14% 
have a college degree; they are also more likely to live in zip codes with higher fractions of governmentinsured mothers, and to have been users of the ED prior to the birth. The implication is that 
differences in hospital practices have a larger impact on the delivery modes of lower-SES mothers, 
even conditional on choosing a hospital based on relative distance. This complements the findings 
reported by Johnson and Rehavi (2016), who show that the delivery choices of mothers who are 
themselves physicians are less responsive to the financial incentives faced by their doctors.24 
23 We have estimated our main models excluding Kaiser insurees and find that the resulting IV estimates are very similar to those from 
our larger sample. This is as expected given there are so few Kaiser insurees among the compliers. 24 An earlier study Grytten et al. (2011) finds that in Norway, where c-section rates are among the lowest in the OECD, physician 
mothers are more likely to have c-section. They attribute this to enhanced agency of these mothers in the hospital setting. 
17 
 Panel D of Table IV shows the fractions of compliers whose infants have above-median 
predicted probabilities of an ED visit or inpatient readmission in the year after birth.25 Infants of H&C 
compliers have high risks of an ED visit or readmission, suggesting that these infants may be 
particularly vulnerable to problems at delivery. 
V. Impacts of High C-Section Delivery Practices on Infant and Maternal Health
V.a. Outcomes at Delivery
With this background, we now turn to the health effects of hospital-specific delivery practices. We 
begin in Table V with outcomes realized at delivery. For simplicity we focus on specifications that 
use the continuous version of relative distance as an instrument and include our full set of controls 
(with the first stage model presented in column 3 of Table III). 
For infants, we examine the 5-minute Apgar score, admission to the NICU, use of ventilation, 
and length of hospital stay.26 For mothers, we focus on labor-related injuries and the length of the 
hospital stay. For each outcome, we show the mean among all LRFBs (column 1), and the OLS 
coefficient from a regression of the outcome on and all the individual controls (column 2). Then, 
in columns 3-4 we show the estimated reduced-form effects of the continuous instrument and the 
corresponding IV estimate of the effect of delivery at an H hospital. 
Apgar scores are widely used as diagnostic indicators of newborn health (Casey et al. 2001).
27
Score range from 0 to 10: a score <7 is often taken as an indicator of poor health at birth (Currie et 
al. 2019) and is highly correlated with neonatal and infant mortality (Iliodromiti et al. 2014). Note that 
the average fraction of infants with a low Apgar score (<7) is under 1%, underscoring the severity of 
this condition. In OLS models, delivery at an H hospital has a modest negative effect on the 
probability of a score <7. The reduced form effect of relative distance is also negative and significant 
(p=0.025); the associated IV estimate is relatively large in magnitude (-0.8 percentage points) and 
significant (p=0.025). 
25 We estimate logit models for the probabilities, including the full set of controls but excluding HSA dummies. We emphasize that 
higher risk of an ED visit represents a combination of worse health and a higher probability that the family takes the infant to an ED 
rather than a doctor office or clinic.
26 We use Vital Statistics reports of Apgar scores, birth injuries, NICU admissions, and ventilation. 27 The Apgar is based on 5 components (breathing, heart rate, muscle tone, reflexes, and skin color) each of which is scored 0 1 or 2. 
See Finster and Wood (2005) for a brief history and discussion of the test. We have also looked at the 1-minute Apgar – the results are 
similar but slightly attenuated. Existing studies, briefly summarized in Online Appendix Table A-I, suggest that there is a positive 
association between the 5 minute Apgar score and outcomes later in life, including IQ at age 18 (Odd et al. 2007) and the probability of 
graduating from high school (Stuart et al. 2011), driven by relatively poor outcomes for infants with scores of 7 or less.
Hi
Zi
18 
 To help understand this effect we examined the effect of delivery at an H hospital on a set of 
joint outcomes representing the combination of delivery mode (vaginal or cesarean), timing of birth 
relative to mother's arrival at hospital (same day or 1+ days later) and high- versus low-Apgar (<7 or 
≥7).28 The results, summarized in Online Appendix Table II, show that nearly all the effect of delivery 
at an H hospital on the rate of low Apgar scores derives from a reduction in the joint event of a late 
delivery and a low Apgar score.29 Interestingly, about half of this effect comes from a reduction in late 
cesarean deliveries with low Apgar scores, and half from a reduction in the late vaginal deliveries with 
a low Apgar scores. These results suggest that the practice of ending labor earlier at H hospitals has a 
net positive effect on infants born after long deliveries, some of whom would be delivered vaginally 
if the mother had gone to an L hospital (i.e., the H&C compliers) and some of whom would be 
delivered by a late cesarean (the H-complier/C-always takers).30 
Looking at the other health outcomes for infants in Table V, we find that delivering at H 
hospitals has little or no effect on NICU admissions, but a positive effect on the incidence of 
ventilation. The latter is consistent with a large literature suggesting that infants delivered by cesarean 
are more likely to have problems with fluid in their lungs and initiation of breathing (see Online 
Appendix A). Last, we examine the newborn’s length of stay. OLS models indicate that infants born 
at H hospitals spend about 0.16 extra days in hospital before going home. In contrast, IV estimates 
show insignificant effects, though we cannot rule out modest impacts (of either sign). 
 The bottom panel of the table focuses on maternal outcomes at birth. We first examine the 
rates of two common complications associated with difficult labors. (As highlighted earlier, our data 
and design are under-powered for a fuller analysis of the effects of H delivery on rare but important 
maternal health outcomes). First-time mothers commonly experience both perineal laceration (PL) 
and trauma to the perineum and vulva (29% for PL, 46% for trauma). Both complications are highly 
negatively associated with c-section delivery, as these complications mainly stem from the process of 
labor and vaginal delivery. Thus, perhaps unsurprisingly, both the OLS and IV estimates of the effect 
of delivery at an H hospital are relatively large and negative. 
28 Unfortunately, we do not observe exact time of admission or hour of birth. We only know the days elapsed between her admission 
to the hospital and the birth date of the baby. According to Declercq et al. (2006), the mean time in labor for first-time mothers is 
around 11 hours. Consistent with this, the delay from admission to birth is 0 or 1 day in 95% of cases. 29 Specifically, of the 0.82 percentage point reduction in the rate of low Apgar scores, 0.65 percentage points comes from a reduction 
in the probability of a late deliver and a low Apgar (standard error=0.26). 30 We have also investigated other indicators of prolonged labor, including a code on the birth certificate, which yields qualitatively 
similar results. However, average reported rates for prolonged labor on the birth certificate vary widely across hospitals (from 0 to 16%) 
so we are reluctant to attach much weight to this variable and do not use it elsewhere in the paper. 
19 
Turning to maternal length of stay, we estimate separate models for the number of days from 
admission to the birth, and for the number of days from birth until maternal discharge, i.e. the postbirth LOS. As expected, OLS models show that mothers who deliver at H hospitals have a shorter 
period from hospital admission to birth, offset by a longer post-birth stay. Turning to the IV estimates, 
we find that delivery at an H hospital has a negative effect on the length of labor (consistent with the 
results in Table III) and a small positive effect on the post-birth stay of mothers. Consequently, the 
net effect on the total length of the maternal stay is small (-0.045+0.075 = 0.03 days) and statistically 
insignificant, similar to our findings for infant LOS. 
At first glance the small and insignificant effect of delivery at a high c-section hospital seems 
inconsistent with the average duration for mothers who deliver by c-section is longer than the average 
for mothers who deliver vaginally. However, it is important to interpret this finding in light of the 
potential outcomes for the two groups who deliver by cesarean at H hospitals: the C-AT’s, who would 
have a c-section regardless of hospital choice, and the H&C compliers. For the always-takers (who are 
about 2× more prevalent) the shorter time in labor at H hospitals is potentially helpful, shortening the 
needed recovery time after surgery. The net benefit for the compliers is less clear: some would have 
significant injuries if they delivered at an L hospital, so the switch to cesarean delivery could reduce 
the post-birth stay. Others might have been able to deliver vaginally without injuries, implying that the 
switch to an H hospital and a cesarean delivery would increase their post-birth length of stay. Taking 
account of these three sets of effects and the higher prevalence of C-AT’s we believe it is highly 
plausible that average length of stay is about the same at H and L hospitals.31
V.b. Post-Delivery Admission Outcomes – Infants
We now turn to our main health outcomes based on hospital and ED/ASC visits in the year after 
birth. For infants, in the upper panel of Table VI, we show results for six outcomes: (1) any ED visit 
in the year after birth; (2) an ED visit for acute respiratory conditions; (3) any readmission to hospital 
in the first month after birth (the neonatal period); (4) any readmission to hospital in the year after 
birth; (5) 6 or more days in the hospital or death within a month of birth; (6) death within a year of 
birth. We include the fifth outcome, combining longer inpatient stays and death in the neonatal 
period, as a proxy for an “adverse health event” at birth. This outcome has a reasonably high rate of 
31 We have investigated a few other outcomes at birth, namely unplanned hysterectomy and asphyxia of the neonate. In our sample, the 
mean rate of unplanned hysterectomy is only 1 in 10,000; we find no evidence of an effect of H delivery, but the precision of our 
estimates is low. Asphyxia is also rare (3.2 per 1000), and we find very weak evidence (t=0.5) that H hospital reduce asphyxia. There is 
somewhat stronger evidence that H hospitals reduce asphyxia-related infant deaths. 
20 
prevalence (67 per 1,000) whereas death among LRFB’s is extremely rare, making it relatively difficult 
to model.32
The estimated OLS coefficients imply that delivery at an H hospital is associated with small 
positive effects on ED visits and inpatient stays, and with a higher probability of a longer hospital stay 
or death in the first month. These results are broadly consistent with a large observational literature 
suggesting that higher rates of cesarean delivery are correlated with worse infant health outcomes. 
In contrast, the IV estimates suggest a more nuanced story. Specifically, our IV estimates of 
the effect on ED visits are relatively large and positive, particularly for respiratory-related illnesses. 
The point estimate represents a nearly 40% increase in the incidence of these visits, accounting for 
about 60% of the overall rise in ED visits. On the other hand, the IV estimates also indicate a 
significant reduction in the risk of more severe conditions that necessitate a hospital stay and possibly 
lead to death, particularly in the first month. 
More insight into these offsetting effects is provided in Figure III, where we plot the estimated 
cumulative hospital readmission rates (Panel a) and ED visit rates (Panel b) by month for hospital 
compliers who deliver at H and L hospitals – i.e., the potential outcomes of the compliers, estimated 
using the suggestion of Abadie (2003) – as well as the associated cumulated treatment effects of 
delivering at an H hospital (with point-wise confidence bands). Focusing first on Panel a, we see that 
the time path of readmissions is concave, with a particularly pronounced rise in the first month after 
birth for compliers who deliver at L hospitals. The estimated (IV) effect of delivery at an H hospital 
emerges in the first month and then stabilizes, indicative of a health gap at birth for children delivered 
in L hospitals that requires readmission. This pattern is consistent with recent experimental and 
observational studies showing that policies that prolong the second stage of labor (as at L hospitals) 
lead to lower c-section rates but to some immediate neonatal complications (Zipori et al. 2019; 
Gimovsky and Berghella 2016).33 The time profiles of the cumulative probabilities of an ED visit 
(Panel b) are less concave and only diverge gradually, with a higher rate of growth (i.e., a higher hazard 
of a first ED visit) for compliers who deliver at H hospitals. The estimated (IV) effect of delivery at 
32 Online Appendix Table III shows the characteristics of all LRFBs and those that resulted in an infant death within a year of birth. 
Infants that die are about 7 times more likely to be low birth weight (<2,500 grams) than those that survive, and over 30% have a 5-
minute Apgar score below 7. Infants that ultimately die are about 4 times more likely to be readmitted as an inpatient but have about 
the same probability of an ED visit in the year after birth as other infants. They are also more likely to have been delivered by cesarean, 
though the latter correlation is driven by procedures with no signs of labor: the mean death rate is 1.1/1000 for vaginal births, 0.9 for 
c-sections with signs of labor, and 2.9 for cesareans with no signs of labor. 33 Given the small sample size, these studies are somewhat underpowered to obtain precise estimates of the health impacts of 
prolonging the second stage of labor.
21 
an H hospital on infant ED visits appears to be very small in the neonatal period, starts materializing 
approximately two months after birth and keeps on rising throughout the first year of life. 
Sensitivity analysis. Although we noted in the discussion of Table II that relative distance to 
an H hospital (our main instrumental variable) is orthogonal to a wide set of maternal characteristics 
and risk factors, it is informative to examine how the estimated effects of relative distance on infant 
ED visits, readmissions, and death are affected by including or excluding these characteristics.34 The 
results of such an exercise are summarized in the four panels of Figure IV, each of which shows the 
range of possible reduced form impacts that could be obtained by adding any combination of 12 groups 
of additional controls to our basic control set (for a listing of these groups of controls, see Online 
Appendix Figure I, which groups the variables from Table II). Specifically, for a given k=0,…,12 we 
randomly select k of the 12 possible groups of controls, then re-estimate the reduced form models. 
By repeatedly sampling we obtain a distribution of potential reduced form estimates for each k. The 
panels in Figure IV show the minimum, maximum, mean, and median reduced form estimate for all 
ED visits (panel a), ED visits for acute respiratory conditions (panel b), inpatient readmissions in the 
first month (panel c), and neonatal death (panel d). Consistent with the results in Table II, we find 
that adding any subset of controls has a negligible effect on the magnitude (or precision) of the reduced 
form effects of relative distance on either measure of ED visits or on the reduced form effects on 
inpatient readmissions or death in the neonatal period.35 Online Appendix Figure I shows the results 
of a similar robustness exercise, in which we include only one set of these additional controls at a time 
for interpretability; results are again very stable. 
Interpreting estimated effect on infant death. Our IV point estimate of the effect of H 
delivery on infant death (2.6/1000) is large relative to the mean death rate for all LRFBs of 1.2/1000, 
though we emphasize that the estimate is only on the border of conventional statistical significance. 
Nevertheless, to contextualize the plausibility of this estimate, we provide two additional pieces of 
evidence. 
First, as we noted in the discussion of Table IV, infants of the compliers whose behavior 
drives the IV estimates are less healthy than other LRFB’s. We therefore estimated the mean potential 
death rate of the hospital complier group when delivering at L hospitals The estimated rate is 2.2 
deaths per thousand (with a standard error of 1.0 deaths), which is substantially higher than the overall 
34 See Altonji, Elder and Taber (2005) and Oster (2017) for discussions. 35 The first stage effect of relative distance on the probability of delivering at an H hospital is extremely stable across specifications that 
add any or all the extra controls.
22 
mean for LRFBs, suggesting that the infants of distance-complying mothers are frailer than the overall 
population. Relative to this base rate, however, the estimated effect of delivery at an H hospital is still 
very large. 
Second, we address a possible objection to our modeling framework: that the risk of death is 
so low that a linear probability model is inappropriate. In Online Appendix Table III we re-estimate 
the reduced-form model using logistic and probit regressions. In both cases, we find that relative 
distance has a negative effect on the risk of death (with p-value of 0.045 for logistic and 0.039 for 
probit, versus 0.032 in the OLS reduced form model). Moreover, the implied average marginal effect 
of a 10-mile reduction in the relative distance to an H hospital is quite similar to the effect implied by 
our OLS reduced form: −0.034 in both the logistic and probit specifications, versus −0.026 for the 
OLS model.36 We conclude that relative proximity to an H hospital has a comparably sized negative 
effect on the probability of death regardless of functional form, but again emphasize that these results 
should be interpreted cautiously given that our confidence intervals of these effects all begin near 0. 
V.c. Post-Delivery Admission Outcomes – Mothers
Returning to Table VI, the lower panel presents a parallel set of models for maternal ED visits and 
readmissions in the year after birth. OLS models show that delivery at an H hospital is associated 
with a small increase in the probability of visiting an ED or ASC in the following year, and a very small 
effect on inpatient readmissions. The associated IV estimates show the same pattern, with positive 
but insignificant point estimates for both types of visits (p=0.11 for ED/ASC visits; p=0.16 for 
inpatient visits). We conclude that any effects of delivery at an H hospital on mothers ED or 
readmissions in the year after birth may be positive but are likely smaller in magnitude that the effects 
on infants. We also note that these outcomes do not capture some of the important hypothesized 
effects of increased rates of cesarean delivery on mothers. For example, we do not have sufficient 
power to investigate issues such as the possibility that a higher cesarean delivery rate leads to higher 
risk of placenta previa in subsequent births.
V.d. Falsification Test Based on Breech Deliveries
A concern with our distance-based IV strategy is that H hospitals have other practice differences 
that contribute to the reduced-form effect of relative distance on infant health. We evaluate this 
36 We also conducted a similar analysis using a binary version of the instrument – which yields a very similar IV estimate of the effect 
of death – and found that computing the reduced form effect using OLS or logit gives nearly the same effect. 
23 
concern using multi-channel models in the next section. Before proceeding, however, we briefly 
discuss a simple falsification test using breech presentation pregnancies, which in recent years are 
nearly always delivered by cesarean in the U.S.37 Specifically, we constructed a sample of low-risk 
breech presentation first births (BPFBs), and fit our first-stage and reduced-form models, looking 
for any evidence of different birth outcomes at H versus L hospitals.38 If H hospitals differ from L 
hospitals in ways that impact health outcomes independent of delivery mode, we might expect those 
effects to manifest in the BPFP population, for whom delivery mode is not a function of their 
delivery hospital. 
As shown in Online Appendix Table IV, we find that the first-stage effect of relative 
distance on the probability of delivery at an H hospital is about the same for BPFBs as LRFBs, while 
the effect on cesarean delivery is insignificant as expected. However, in contrast to the positive
reduced form effect of relative distance on the probability of an ED visit for respiratory-related 
problems in the year after birth for LRFBs, we find a zero effect for BPFBs (estimate = -0.002, 
standard error = 0.097). Similarly, instead of the negative reduced form effect on the probability of an 
inpatient readmission in the neonatal period for LRFBs, we find a marginally significant positive 
effect for BPFBs (estimate = 0.133, standard error = 0.066). Reassuringly, there is no evidence that 
practice differences or unobserved characteristics of H hospitals lead to a positive bias in the effect 
of H delivery on respiratory-related ED visits or a negative bias in the effect on neonatal admissions. 
V.e. Allowing for Other Hospital Practice Differences
A concern for interpreting our findings on the effects of delivery practices at H hospitals is the 
possibility of other practices (that do not determine delivery mode) differing at these hospitals. While 
all our models control for differences in NICU, ownership, delivery volume, and breastfeeding 
initiation, and our falsification test based on breech deliveries is reassuring, one might still be worried 
about the possible impact of such differences. 
As a way to address these concerns, we classify hospitals based on the risk-adjusted outcomes of 
infants there and add a control for the class of the hospital. To the extent that unobserved 
37 Policy in the U.S. regarding c-section for breech position was heavily influenced by results from a randomized trial in 2000 that 
found lower risk of death for cesarean delivery. Mühlrad (2019) studies the effect of the publication of the trial results in Sweden, 
where cesarean rates for breech position rose, but did not reach anything like U.S. levels. 38 The sample contains 12,744 breech presentation first births with no other risk factors. 98% were delivered by cesarean. The 
mothers are better educated and more likely to be white non-Hispanic than those in our main sample. The infants have very similar 
mean birth weights as LRFB’s (3278 grams versus 3348) are somewhat less likely to have an ED visit in the year after birth (30.9% 
versus 33.8%) or an inpatient readmission (7.3% versus 8.2%).
24 
characteristics of a given hospital lead to different health outcomes, these will be revealed in the 
average outcomes of infants born at that hospital and captured by the control for the class of the 
hospital. Given our main infant health outcomes of interest, we classify hospitals along four 
dimensions: (1) high or low fraction of infants with an Apgar score <7; (2) high or low fraction of 
infants born at the hospital that have an ED visit in the year after birth; (3) high or low fraction of 
infants born at the hospital that have an inpatient readmission in the year after birth; (4) high or low 
fraction of infants born at the hospital that die within a year of birth. 
Since the choice of delivery hospital is endogenous, we follow the same steps we used to 
develop our primary instrumental variable (%!) and form 4 new instrumental variables based on relative 
distance to a high- versus low-outcome hospitals. We then fit a set of models that include controls 
for all 4 outcome classes of the delivery hospital as well as its high or low c-section status.
Table VII presents the results for these multichannel models. We focus on a set of 7 outcomes, 
ranging from the incidence of a low Apgar score to death within a year of birth. For reference, in the 
odd-numbered columns of the Table we report the estimated IV coefficient for H delivery from our 
baseline specification. Then, in the even numbered columns, we report the estimated coefficients on 
H delivery and on the other four endogenous hospital characteristics. The first-stage models for the 
5 endogenous characteristics, along with the reduced form models for the 7 outcome variables, are 
reported in Online Appendix Table V.39
Looking across the outcomes in Table VII we see that the estimated effect of delivery at a 
high c-section hospital on each of the 7 outcomes is very similar whether we control for the other 4 
endogenous hospital characteristics or not. The estimated standard errors from the multichannel 
models are typically 25% larger, and the point estimates move up or down slightly, so the effects on 
low Apgar scores and death outcomes are no longer significant at conventional levels. For ED visits 
and neonatal inpatient visits, however, the estimated effects of delivery remain highly significant. This 
analysis suggests that our estimates are not confounded by other hospital practices. 
Based on this evidence we conclude that even when we account for both observed differences 
across hospitals and for unobserved factors that shift mean infant health outcomes across hospitals, 
there is systematic evidence that delivery at hospitals with policies leading to higher c-section rates 
leads to offsetting health costs and benefits, with rises in ED visits in the year after birth but a 
39 The first stage models all show that relative proximity to a high versus low outcome hospital in a specific domain is the dominant 
factor predicting the choice of a high outcome hospital in that domain. The multi-equation F-statistic for the set of 5 first stage 
models is reassuringly large. Results for specifications where we control only for one endogenous hospital characteristic at a time are 
reported in Online Appendix Table VI and yield very similar conclusions.
25 
reduction in the rate of inpatient visits immediately after birth. Moreover, delivery at a high c-section 
hospital has if anything a negative effect on infant mortality. 
V.f. Heterogeneity in the Health Effects of Delivery at a High C-Section Hospital
One issue for the interpretation and extrapolation of our findings is the extent of heterogeneity in the 
treatment effects associated with delivery at a high c-section hospital.40 To address this, in Online 
Appendix D, we extend our instrumental variables setup using a simple control function approach 
that allows for a random effect in the impact of H delivery (Garen 1984; Heckman and Vytlacil 1998; 
Wooldridge 2015). The results of this analysis suggest that average treatment effects (ATEs) of delivery 
at a high c-section hospital are very close to the LATEs from our baseline IV procedure. Additionally, 
we find little evidence of heterogeneity along markers of infant health (birthweight & gestation), some 
evidence of heterogeneity across HRRs with lower and higher c-section rates, and mixed evidence on 
the question of Roy-style sorting across outcomes, which may not be too surprising given that the 
effect of delivery at H varies across outcomes.
VI. Summary and Discussion
Summary of impacts. Taken together, our results paint a nuanced picture of the healthrelated costs and benefits of hospital delivery policies. To help summarize our findings, consider a 
shift of 100 LRFB deliveries for H-complying mothers from a low c-section hospital (L) to a high csection hospital (H). Our analysis suggests that this move would lead to around 11 extra c-sections, 
with 5 fewer vaginal deliveries on the day of the mother’s arrival and 6 fewer vaginal deliveries at least 
a day after. At birth there would be 7 fewer mothers with 2nd degree or higher perineal lacerations 
and 0.8 fewer infants with a 5-minute Apgar score <7. In the year after the birth there would be 8.8
additional infants with at least one ED visit (5 of which are for respiratory-related illnesses), but 3.2
fewer infants with an inpatient stay, mainly in the neonatal period. In addition, there is evidence of 
roughly 0.2 fewer infant deaths. 
 On the cost side, the extra ED visits point toward a reduction in the respiratory health of the 
newborns, consistent with a growing body of epidemiological and clinical studies (Hyde et al. 2012) 
that suggests immune-system benefits of vaginal birth. These costs could accumulate if some of the 
infants delivered by cesarean go on to develop asthma, which has also been suggested in the 
40 There is a large and growing literature on heterogeneous treatment effects: see Imbens and Wooldridge (2009) for a general discussion 
and Cornelissen et al. (2016) for a recent survey emphasizing heterogeneity in marginal treatment effects.
26 
epidemiological literature (e.g., Keag et al. 2018). On the benefit side, the combination of fewer lowApgar infants, lower inpatient readmissions, and potentially lower deaths suggest some important 
advantages for a subset of the infants delivered by cesarean after a shorter labor rather than by cesarean 
or vaginally after a long and stressful labor. Apart from the result on death, these benefits could still 
be long-lasting if, as suggested in recent studies, the prevention of births with low Apgar scores leads 
to improved outcomes later in life (e.g., Stuart et al. 2011), or more generally if the elimination of some 
prolonged stressful labors leads to improved long-term health.41 
How do our estimates relate to the existing literature? With respect to the health impacts of 
earlier c-section, Tolcher et al. (2014) present a meta-analysis of the related literature on the effects of 
the delay between the time a decision is made to perform c-section and delivery. They find an 
inconclusive link, though some studies – e.g. Thomas et al. (2004) – find that that extended delay is 
associated with worse outcomes. Rennie and Rosenbloom (2011) review animal and human studies 
on the timing of delivery and the risk of hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy (brain injury due to 
asphyxia) and conclude there is strong evidence of a link, though the reported incidence of this 
condition in our data is extremely low (0.2 per 1,000 births). Finally, it is worth noting that there is 
extensive litigation in the U.S. arising from claims that c-section was performed “too late” or was not 
performed when it was indicated, resulting in injuries or death of the infant. Our reading is that courts 
have often agreed with the plaintiffs, despite the lack of a clear scientific consensus. 
Possible effects on mothers and future births. Our analysis has mainly focused on infants, 
but we note that there are also potentially important health concerns for mothers and later children 
associated with the policies at H hospitals. Looking at maternal ED visits and inpatient readmissions 
in the year after birth we find no evidence of large impacts of delivery at an H hospital (Table VI), but 
it is important to note that a body of clinical literature suggests there may be important long-run effects 
of cesarean delivery that are not measured in our approach. One important factor is that first-time 
mothers who deliver by cesarean are very likely to have all subsequent births by c-section. This means 
that there are likely health impacts for their future children, such as risk of respiratory illnesses. 
Additionally, there is clinical evidence that mothers who have had a c-section are at increased risk of 
abnormal placentation in subsequent pregnancies (see Online Appendix Table A-II). There is also 
some epidemiological and design-based evidence that a primary c-section reduces subsequent fertility 
(e.g., Halla et al. 2020), though Mühlrad (2019) finds no fertility impact of a policy that led to more 
41 For example, in an observational study of around 150,000 births in Sweden Sandstrom et al. (2017) conclude that prolonged labor is 
associated with birth-asphyxia related complications. 
27 
cesarean deliveries for breech presentation births. On the other hand, cesarean delivery could lead to 
reduced risk of pelvic floor disorders (see Keag et al. 2018 for a recent review) which affect a high 
fraction of all women. 
 Though our data do not permit a full analysis of these important margins, we did attempt to 
examine impacts on fertility and on higher-order births, with results presented in Online Appendix 
Table VII. The estimates point to a negative, albeit imprecise, impact of delivering at an H hospital at 
first birth on the probability of having a second birth during our sample period. Our point estimate 
of a 3.5 ppt fertility reduction (with a standard error of 2.2 ppts) over our sample period is in line with 
estimates from Halla et al. (2020). Conditional on having a second birth in sample, delivery at an H 
hospital at first birth leads to an increase in c-section rates at 2nd birth of 16.6 ppts (s.e. = 4.2 ppt). 
Unlike first births, the increase in c-section rates is almost entirely driven by an increase in scheduled 
procedures. In line with this finding, we find suggestive evidence that second-born infants have slightly 
shorter gestation and lower birth weight (although none of these estimates are statistically significant). 
Consistent with the idea that many of the complications associated with cesarean deliveries manifest 
during subsequent pregnancies, we find suggestive evidence that, at second birth, mothers and their 
infants experience longer length of stay at birth and a higher probability of rehospitalization in the 
first year after birth. We caution that this analysis should be interpreted carefully, both because of 
power issues and because of the possibility of compositional effects deriving from differential fertility. 
VII. Conclusion
As countries around the world grapple with how to stem the growing use of unnecessary and costly 
medical interventions, hospitals with high intervention rates, especially among patients without any 
medical risk factors, face increasing scrutiny. In the case of childbirth, c-section rates around the world 
have skyrocketed over the past two decades, in many places far exceeding the World Health 
Organization’s longstanding recommended rates of 10-15%.
42 Supply-side efforts to reduce these rates 
often focus on low-risk first births, where hospital delivery practices vary enormously, but where our 
understanding of the costs and benefits of these differing practices is limited. 
 This paper has examined some of the primary costs and benefits of high c-section hospital 
delivery practices among low-risk first births. Our distance-based instrumental variables analysis 
42 The World Health Organization revised these recommendations in 2018, but the 10-15% range from their 1985 report is still 
frequently cited as a benchmark. See https://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/guidance-to-reduce-unnecessary-caesareansections/en/
28 
suggests that hospital delivery practices at high c-section hospitals have important infant health 
benefits as well as costs. The benefits derive from the truncation of long, difficult labors that risk 
causing serious harm when allowed to proceed, as many would at low c-section hospitals. One possible 
explanation is that hospitals do not know which c-sections are (un)necessary until after the fact, as they 
are unable to perfectly identify which observably low-risk infants would suffer most from longer 
labors. We also document important negative impacts of high c-section delivery practices on infant 
health, most notably the increased risk of ED visits in the year after birth; these potentially long-lasting 
effects should be considered in developing policies to regulate delivery practices. 
It is important to note some important limitations of our analysis. First, our analysis of first 
births in California is underpowered to study cascading effects of first-birth delivery practices on
second and higher-order births where the practice of vaginal birth after c-section (VBAC) is the subject 
of considerable debate. Second, our findings may not generalize to contexts with different—especially 
higher—baseline intervention rates. And third, our data, while comprehensive, only capture relatively 
serious health outcomes. We do not capture subtler hypothesized effects of delivery mode on 
outcomes such as the child’s weight gain or cognitive functioning that may be reported in primary 
care visit data and education records later in life. Further analysis along these dimensions would help 
provide a more complete picture of the costs and benefits of hospital delivery practices. 
Despite these caveats, our analysis provides a first step towards understanding the potential 
ramifications of proposals to reduce low-risk primary cesarean delivery rates. Methodologically, we 
provide guidance on ways to evaluate and extend distance-based research designs for analyzing 
hospital practices. Our findings suggest that designs based on local differences in hospital types and 
patient location could prove useful for achieving improved balance in similar designs, thus facilitating 
research in non-emergency settings where ambulance-based designs, as in Doyle et al. (2015), are 
infeasible. Finally, we show how concerns over correlated care can be addressed using a 
straightforward multi-channel instrumental variables approach. These issues arise frequently in 
evaluations in healthcare (e.g. McClellan et al. 1994; Doyle et al. 2015), education (e.g. Walters 2015), 
welfare programs (e.g. Doyle 2007), crime (e.g. Kling 2006), and public assistance (e.g. Maestas et al. 
2013). An approach similar to ours could be applied in a variety of settings where data on multiple 
characteristics and outcomes of the unit of study – the hospital in our case – are available. 
References
Abadie, A. (2003). Semiparametric instrumental variable estimation of treatment response models. Journal of 
Econometrics, 113(2), 231-263.
Alexander, D. (2015). Does physician pay affect procedure choice and patient health? Evidence from 
Medicaid c-section use. Working paper. 
Altonji, J. G., Elder, T. E., and Taber, C. R. (2005). Selection on observed and unobserved variables: 
Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools. Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 151-184.
Amaral-Garcia, S., Bertoli, P., Friedrichsen, J., and Grembi, V. (2016). Hospital-level policy can affect 
physician behavior and reduce C-section rates. DIW Economic Bulletin, Deutsches Institut ffs 
Wirtschaftsforschung (DIW), Berlin, 6(43), 495-501. 
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) (2014). Safe prevention of the primary 
cesarean delivery. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 123(1), 693-711. 
Baicker, K., A. Chandra and J. Skinner (2012). Saving Money or Just Saving Lives? Improving the 
Productivity of U.S. Health Care Spending. Annual Review of Economics, 4, 33-56.
Barnato, A. E., et al. (2005). Hospital Level Racial Disparities in Acute Myocardial Infarction Treatment and 
Outcomes. Medical Care, 43(4), 308-319.
Beckert, W., Christensen, M., and Collyer, K. (2012). Choice of NHS-funded hospital services in England. 
The Economic Journal, 122(560), 400-417.
Bloom, N., Propper, C., Seiler, S., & Van Reenen, J. (2015). The impact of competition on management 
quality: evidence from public hospitals. The Review of Economic Studies, 82(2), 457-489.
Boerma, T., Ronsmans, C., Melesse, D. Y., Barros, A. J., Barros, F. C., Juan, L., ... & Neto, D. D. L. R. 
(2018). Global epidemiology of use of and disparities in caesarean sections. The Lancet, 392(10155), 
1341-1348.
Casey, B. M., McIntire, D. D., and Leveno, K. J. (2001). The continuing value of the Apgar score for the 
assessment of newborn infants. New England Journal of Medicine, 344(7), 467-471.
Chandra, A. and Staiger, D. O. (2007). Productivity spillovers in healthcare: evidence from the treatment of 
heart attacks. Journal of Political Economy, 115(1), 103-140.
Chandra, A. and Staiger, D. O. (2020). Identifying sources of inefficiency in health care. The Quarterly Journal 
of Economics, 135(2), 785–843.
Chernozhukov, V., and Hansen, C. (2005). An IV model of quantile treatment effects. Econometrica, 73(1), 
245-261.
Clark, E. A., and Silver, R. M. (2011). Long-term maternal morbidity associated with repeat cesarean 
delivery. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 205(6), S2-S10. 
Cohen, W. R., Sumersille, M., and Friedman, E.A. (2018). Management of labor: Are the new guidelines 
justified? Journal of Midwifery and Women's Health, 63(1), 10-13. 
Cornelissen, T., Dustmann, C., Raute, A., and Schoenberg, U. (2016). From LATE to MTE: Alternative 
approaches for the evaluation of policy interventions. Labour Economics, 41, 47-60.
Costa-Ramón, A. M., Rodriguez-Gonzalez, A., Serra-Burruel, M. and Campillo-Arero, C. (2018). It’s about 
time: Cesarean sections and neonatal health. Journal of Health Economics, 59, 46-59.
Currie, J., and MacLeod, W. B. (2008). First do no harm? Tort reform and birth outcomes. Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, 123(2), 795-830.
Currie, J., and MacLeod, W. B. (2017). Diagnosing Expertise: Human Capital, Decision Making, and 
Performance among Physicians. Journal of Labor Economics, 35(1), 1-43.
Currie, J. and Mueller-Smith, M. and Rossin-Slater, M (2019). Violence while in Utero: The Impact of 
Assaults During Pregnancy on Birth Outcomes. NBER Working Paper #24802. Cambridge MA: NBER.
Cutler, D. (2007). The lifetime costs and benefits of medical technology. Journal of Health Economics, 26(6), 
1081-1100.
Cutler, D., Skinner, J. S., Stern, A. D., & Wennberg, D. (2019). Physician beliefs and patient preferences: A 
new look at regional variation in health care spending. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(1), 
192-221.
Dartmouth Atlas, undated. List of Hospital Referral Regions. Available at: 
http://www.dartmouthatlas.org/tools/faq/researchmethods.aspx. 
Dembosky, A. (2018). California's Message To Hospitals: Shape Up Or Lose 'In-Network' Status. NPR 
Report. Downloaded from https://www.npr.org/sections/healthshots/2018/05/23/611975420/californias-message-to-hospitals-shape-up-or-lose-in-network-status
Declercq, E. R., Sakala, C., Corry, M. P., and Applebaum, S. (2006). Listening to Mothers II: Report of the 
Second National US Survey of Women's Childbearing Experiences. New York: Childbirth Connections. 
Doyle, J. J Jr. (2007). "Child Protection and Child Outcomes: Measuring the Effects of Foster
Care." American Economic Review, 97 (5): 1583-1610.
Doyle Jr, J. J., Graves, J. A., Gruber, J., and Kleiner, S. A. (2015). Measuring returns to hospital care: 
Evidence from ambulance referral patterns. Journal of Political Economy, 123(1), 170-214.
Dubay, L., Kaestner, R., and Waidman, T. (1999). The impact of malpractice fears on cesarean section rates. 
Journal of Health Economics, 18(4), 491-522.
Epstein, A. J., & Nicholson, S. (2009). The formation and evolution of physician treatment styles: An 
application to cesarean sections. Journal of Health Economics, 28(6), 1126-1140.
Finkelstein, A., Gentzkow, M., and Williams, H. (2016). Sources of Geographic Variation in Health Care: 
Evidence from Patient Migration. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4), 1681-1726.
Finster, M., and Wood, M. (2005). The Apgar score has survived the test of time. The Journal of the American 
Society of Anesthesiologists, 102(4), 855-857.
Fisher, E., Wennberg, D.E., Stukel, T.A., Gottleib, D.J., Lucas, F.L. and Pinder, E.L. (2003). The 
implications of regional variations in Medicare spending. Part 2: Health outcomes and satisfaction with 
care. Annals of Internal Medicine, 138(4), 288–298.
Frigoletto, F. D., Lieberman, E., Lang, J. M., Cohen, A., Barss, V., Ringer, S., and Datta, S. (1995). A 
Clinical Trial of Active Management of Labor. The New England Journal of Medicine, 333(12), 745-750.
Garabedian, L. F., Chu, P., Toh, S., Zaslavsky, A. M., and Soumerai, S. B. (2014). Potential Bias of 
Instrumental Variable Analyses for Observational Comparative Effectiveness Research. Annals of Internal 
Medicine, 161(2), 131-138.
Garen, John (1984). The returns to schooling: A selectivity bias approach with a continuous choice variable. 
Econometrica, 52(5), 1199-1218.
Gimovsky, A. C., and Berghella, V. (2016). Randomized controlled trial of prolonged second stage: 
extending the time limit vs usual guidelines. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 3(214), 361-e1.
Goer, H., Romano, A. and Sakala, C. (2012). Vaginal or cesarean birth: What is at stake for women and 
babies? New York: Childbirth Connections. 
Gregory, K. D., Korst, L. M., Gornbein, J. A., and Platt, L. D. (2002). Using Administrative Data to Identify 
Indications for Elective Primary Cesarean Delivery. Health Services Research, 37(5), 1387-1401.
Gregory, K. D., Jackson, S., Korst, L., and Fridman, M. (2012). Cesarean versus Vaginal Delivery: Whose 
Risks? Whose Benefits? American Journal of Perinatology, 29(01), 07-18.
Gruber, J., and Owings, M. (1996). Physician financial incentives and cesarean section delivery. RAND 
Journal of Economics, 27(1), 99. 
Grytten, J., Skau, I., and Sørensen, R. (2011). Do expert patients get better treatment than others? Agency 
discrimination and statistical discrimination in obstetrics. Journal of Health Economics, 30(1), 163-180.
Hadley, J. and Peter P. Cunningham (2004). Availability of safety net providers and access to care of 
uninsured persons. Health Services Research, 39(5), 1527-1546.
Halla, M., Mayr, H., Pruckner, G. J., and Garcia-Gomez, P. (2020). Cutting fertility? The effect of cesarean 
deliveries on subsequent fertility and maternal labor supply. Journal of Health Economics, 72, 102325. 
Heckman, J.J. and Vytlacil, E. (1998). Instrumental variables models for the correlated random coefficients 
model: Estimating the average return to schooling when the return is correlated with schooling. Journal of 
Human Resources, 33(4), 974-987.
Henry, O. A., Gregory, K. D., Hobel, C. J., and Platt, L. D. (1995). Using ICD-9 codes to identify 
indications for primary and repeat cesarean sections: Agreement with clinical records. American Journal of 
Public Health, 85(8), 1143. 
Hobbs, A.J., Mannion, C.A., McDonald, S.W. et al. (2016). The impact of caesarean section on 
breastfeeding initiation, duration and difficulties in the first four months postpartum. BMC Pregnancy 
Childbirth 16, 90.
Howell, C. J. (2000). Epidural versus non-epidural analgesia for pain relief in labour. The Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews, (2), CD000331. 
Hyde, M. J., Mostyn, A., Modi, N., and Kemp, P. R. (2012). The health implications of birth by caesarean 
section. Biological Reviews, 87(1), 229-243.
Iliodromiti, Stamatina, Mackay, Daniel F., Smith, Gordon C. S., Pell, Jill P. and Nelson, Scott M. (2014). 
Apgar score and the risk of cause-specific infant mortality: a population-based cohort study. Lancet, 384, 
1749-1755.
Imbens, G.W. and Wooldridge, J.M. (2009). Recent developments in the econometrics of program 
evaluation. Journal of Economic Literature, 47(1), 5-86.
Jachetta, C. (2014) Cesarean Sections and Later Child Health Outcomes. Unpublished manuscript. 
University of Illinois Urbana Champaign Department of Economics. Downloaded from 
http://www.christinejachetta.com/ 
Jensen, V. M. and Wüst, M. (2015). Can cesarean section improve child and maternal health? The case of 
breech babies. Journal of Health Economics, 39, 289-302.
Johnson, E. M., and Rehavi, M. M. (2016). Physicians treating physicians: Information and incentives in 
childbirth. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(1), 115-41.
Joint Commission (2016). Specifications manual for Joint Commission National Quality Measures 
(v2016A1): measure information form. Perinatal Care PC-02: Cesarean Birth. 
Keag, O. E., Norman, J. E., and Stock, S. J. (2018). Long-term risks and benefits associated with cesarean 
delivery for mother, baby, and subsequent pregnancies: Systematic review and meta-analysis. PLOS 
Medicine 15(1), e1002494. 
Klein, M. C. (2006). Does epidural analgesia increase rate of cesarean section? Canadian Family Physician, 
52(4), 419. 
Kling, J. (2006). Incarceration length, employment and earnings. American Economic Review 96(3), 863–876.
Kozhimannil, K. B., Arcaya, M.C. and Subramanian, S.V. (2014). Maternal clinical diagnoses and hospital 
variation in the risk of cesarean delivery: Analyses of a national US hospital discharge database. PLOS 
Medicine, 11(10), e1001745. 
Lee, D.S., McCrary, J., Moreira, M.J., and Porter, J. Valid t-ratio inference for IV. Princeton University 
unpublished manuscript. 
López-Zeno, J. A., Peaceman, A. M., Adashek, J. A., and Socol, M. L. (1992). A controlled trial of a program 
for the active management of labor. New England Journal of Medicine, 326(7), 450-454.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, NICE (2011). Cesarean section. Downloaded from 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg132. 
Maestas, N., Mullen, K. J., & Strand, A. (2013). Does Disability Insurance Receipt Discourage Work? Using 
Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI Receipt. American Economic Review, 103(5), 
1797-1829.
Martin, J. A., Hamilton, B. E., Ventura, S. J., Osterman, M. J. K., and Mathews, T. J. (2013a). Births: final 
data for 2011. National Vital Statistics Reports 62(1) 
Martin, J.A., Wilson, E.C., Osterman, M.J.K., Saadi, E.W., Sutton, S.R., and Hamilton, B.K. (2013b). 
Assessing the quality of medical and health data from the 2003 birth certificate revision: Results from 
two states. Nati