
DISCUSSION PAPERS 963
Simon Bensnes
Time to spare and too much 
care
Congestion and overtreatment at the maternity ward
Discussion Papers No. 963 September 2021
Statistics Norway, Research Department
Simon Bensnes 
Time to spare and too much care
Congestion and overtreatment at the maternity ward
Abstract: 
Identifying the causal effect of resource use on health outcomes is generally complicated by 
endogenous supply and demand adjustments. This paper tackles these issues in the setting of the 
maternity ward using the number of women in local areas with the same due date as an instrument 
for congestion. I find that congestion leads to both fewer and less invasive interventions and better 
health outcomes, indicating medical overtreatment during slower periods. I also show that absent 
instrumentation I find similar results and similar signs of bias as the related literature on congestion in 
maternity wards. 
Keywords: Healthcare, crowdedness, congestion, maternity 
JEL classification: I12, I14, I18 
Acknowledgements: I am grateful for comments from Victoria Marone, Sturla Løkken, Ingrid 
Huitfeldt, Kjetil Telle and seminar participants at Statistics Norway and ASHEcon 2021. I gratefully 
acknowledge financial support from the Norwegian Research Council (grant no. 256678) 
Address: PB 2633 St. Hanshaugen 0131 Norway, Statistics Norway, Research Department. E-mail: 
sdb@ssb.no
Discussion Papers comprise research papers intended for international journals or books. A preprint of a Discussion Paper may be longer and more elaborate than a standard journal article, as it 
may include intermediate calculations and background material etc. 
The Discussion Papers series presents results from ongoing research projects and other 
research and analysis by SSB staff. The views and conclusions in this document are 
those of the authors.
© Statistics Norway
Abstracts with downloadable Discussion Papers
in PDF are available on the Internet:
http://www.ssb.no/en/forskning/discussion-papers
http://ideas.repec.org/s/ssb/dispap.html
ISSN 1892-753X (electronic)
3
Sammendrag
Det er generelt komplisert å etablere en kausal effekt mellom ressursbruk og utfall i helsesektoren på 
grunn av endogene tilpasninger på både tilbuds- og etterspørselssiden. For eksempel gjennom at 
sykere pasienter kan motta flere og dyrere behandlinger. Denne artikkelen håndterer denne 
utfordringen gjennom å fokusere på førstegangsfødende ved Norske fødeavdelinger kombinert med å 
instrumentere for antall kvinner som blir skrevet inn på hver dag. Instrumentet blir konstruert ved å 
først identifisere hvilken fødeavdeling som vanligvis benyttes innenfor hver enkelt av norske 
grunnkretser, som brukes til å klassifisere opptaksområder for hver fødeavdeling. Deretter definerer 
jeg instrumentet som antall kvinner med samme termindato innenfor disse opptaktsområdene. 
Resultatene viser at kvinner som blir skrevet inn på fødeavdelingen på travlere dager opplever færre 
og mindre inngripende behandlinger, og barna som blir født av disse kvinnene har bedre APGARskåre, har lavere reinnleggelsesrater de første 7 og 30 dagene etter fødsel, og er sjeldnere innom 
sykehuset de første leveårene. Det er ingen indikasjoner på at mors helse forverres i tiden rett etter 
fødsel målt ved lengde på opphold eller komplikasjoner. På lengre sikt finner jeg ingen indikasjoner på 
at kvinner som blir skrevet inn i travlere perioder benytter flere helsetjenester.
Robustheten av resultatene blir utforsket og utfordret på en rekke måter. De videre analysene viser at 
store fødeavdelinger blir langt mindre påvirket av travelhet; mødre med hyppigere kontakt med 
helsevesenet og mødre som er registrert gifte påvirkes mindre enn andre.
Samlet viser denne studien at det ikke er noen negativ helseeffekt for kvinner som ankommer 
fødeavdelingen under spesielt travle perioder. Snarere ser det ut til at barna disse kvinnene føder har 
en positiv helseeffekt av travelhet. En mulig årsak til dette er overbehandling av fødende ved rolige 
perioder.
1 Introduction
Healthcare utilization varies within provision systems and is affected by
the supply and demand side in about equal measure, both in the US and
in Europe (Finkelstein et al., 2016; Godøy and Huitfeldt, 2019). Efforts to
uncover the underlying mechanisms driving variations in utilization have
produced a substantial literature identifying important factors on the supply side, such as financial incentives and practice styles (e.g. Skinner, 2011).
This paper adds to the literature on supply side determinants of healthcare
provision by focusing on the role of resource availability through the lens
of exogenous short-term variations in congestion.
Observing rising costs in the healthcare sector, a recurring question in
economics is whether healthcare is increasingly provided at the “flat of the
curve” where the marginal return to health is negligible or even negative.
Some argue that such overtreatment may be widespread and potentially
a major contributor to rapidly increasing healthcare spending (Wennberg,
2010).1 Overtreatment can occur because healthcare providers at the point
of use (e.g. physicians) often have few economic incentives to reduce costs,
such that the marginal cost of treatment equals the marginal value in terms
of health improvement: First, there may be financial incentives to provide
additional treatment beyond the efficient level, rather than minimizing for
given desired patient outcomes. Second, even if a treatment is budget
neutral for the provider at the point of use, excess capacity may in itself
lead to additional treatment provision (Freedman, 2016). Providers may,
for example, choose to provide additional care if they have spare capacity,
under the assumption that the marginal medical treatment has a nonnegative health return and potentially increases patient utility.
Whether or not overtreatment is an important factor behind rising costs,
it is intrinsically difficult to identify its prevalence or even the return to
healthcare treatment and spending overall due to endogeneity. On the
supply side, providers may increase resources used on unobservably sicker
patients, for instance by admitting them on slower days, when staffing
1
It is obvious that patients may value aspects of treatment other than purely health
outcomes. If so, the utility maximizing level of care will deviate from the health optimizing level of care. I will refer to “overtreatment” in the sense that treatment provides
a non-positive return to patient health.
4
is relatively higher and more equipment is available. Such supplier behavior could lead to a negative association between spending and health
outcomes. On the demand side, healthier patients may sort toward certain
suppliers, demand more care or be able to extract more resources from suppliers, which would strengthen any positive correlation between spending
and health outcomes.
This paper provides new evidence of the causal effect of resource availability on medical treatment and health outcomes, and shows that overtreatment occurs even without direct financial incentives. To circumvent endogeneity issues, I focus on exogenous variation in short-term congestion at
Norwegian maternity wards. I define congestion as the number of women
who are admitted to the same ward on the same day. To eliminate threats
to identification I instrument for congestion by predicting congestion levels
using ward catchment areas and due dates.
An attractive feature of using short-term fluctuations in congestion at
maternity wards is that it combines the use of a large and generally healthy
population with a policy-relevant source of variation. Assuming that wards
cannot perfectly adjust to these shocks, unforeseen congestion leads to a
direct reduction in the resources available to each patient.
Results show that short-term variations in resource availability due to
congestion have strong effects on healthcare provision during birth. Specifically, women who are admitted on busier days receive fewer and less invasive interventions while giving birth, including the use of analgesics and
labor inductions. In addition, I find that newborns are less likely to receive
poor APGAR scores and be readmitted the first month after birth.2 This
latter finding is evidence suggesting that some of the medical interventions
induced by reduced congestion levels actually have a negative health return
for the child.
Studying the health outcomes of mothers and children up to 3 years after birth, I find little evidence of increased healthcare utilization for mothers who are admitted on more congested days. Assuming that healthcare
utilization primarily proxies healthcare needs, this finding suggests that
the additional treatment provided due to less congestion has no significant
2AGPAR is an acronym for Activity, Pulse, Grimace, Appearance, and Respiration.
Each of these are given a score from 0 to 2, summing up to a max of 10.
5
effect on longer-term health outcomes.
Detailed administrative data also allows me to provide some evidence as
to which patients are affected when resources become scarcer. For instance,
in line with previous evidence, I find that married women are less affected
than non-married women, which may indicate that patients with more
bargaining power are less affected as argued by Facchini (2019) who also
study resource use in maternity wards.
This paper has four main contributions. First, the paper shows how
policy-relevant variations in available healthcare resources play an important role in determining healthcare provision for a general population in
a common setting, the maternity ward. Though the principle that inputs
(healthcare resources) affect output (healthcare provision) is predictable
from a theoretical perspective, the empirical literature has not reached
a consensus on the importance of this mechanism. In addition, many
past contributions are confined to narrow procedures or patients in lifethreatening situations, as opposed to giving birth, which a large share of
the population experiences (e.g. Doyle J. et al., 2015; Woodworth, 2020).
Second, I show that overtreatment, in the sense that the marginal return
to health is non-positive, occurs even when physicians have no monetary
incentive to increase the amount of care. This finding expands our current understanding of how overtreatment may occur and is informative for
shaping policy to reduce its prevalence.
Third, I use an instrumental variable approach, which address important endogeneity challenges. Such issues have generally been difficult to
resolve in some of the past literature, which has often has relied on a fixed
effects approach controlling for time and provider effects (Freedman, 2016;
Maibom et al., 2020). I show that using a fixed effects framework as an
alternative to the IV strategy yields different results in my setting. Some of
these differences may be caused by heterogeneous treatment effects, but I
find little supporting evidence for that. Rather, I find some evidence of imbalance where parental characteristics are correlated with congestion also
conditional on ward-by-date fixed effects. Thus, the findings suggests that
the identifying assumptions in the fixed effects framework may fail when
studying the effects of healthcare resources.
Last, many past contributions have had little opportunity to explore
6
treatment provision beyond spending. In contrast, I am able to consider
specific interventions at a highly detailed level and measure patient utilization of healthcare services for years after birth.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 relates
and contrasts this paper to the relevant literature, while Section 3 presents
the institutional framework and the data acquired. Section 4 presents the
instrument along with tests of validity and relevance. In Section 5 I present
and challenge the results, while I discuss the findings in Section 6.
2 Relation to literature
The fact that patients with the same health conditions and the same access
to healthcare receive different treatment has been widely observed, but
is not yet widely understood (Skinner, 2011). While past evidence has
shown that patients’ non-medical characteristics, preferences and so on
are central factors, there are also important determinants on the supply
side. For example, Molitor (2018) show that cardiologists who move to
hospitals with different practice techniques change their treatment behavior
and become more similar to their new colleagues. Molitor (2018) further
argues that 60-80% of regional differences in physician behavior is explained
by environmental factors.3
A large literature is devoted to estimating the causal effect of healthcare resources on patient outcomes. Using quasi-experimental variation,
Doyle J. et al. (2015) find that patients who are referred by ambulance
to high-cost hospitals have better health outcomes than otherwise similar
patients who are referred to low-cost hospitals. Focusing on emergency patients admitted while away from home and their usual healthcare provider,
Doyle (2011) find that patients who are exposed to higher-spending health3Economic incentives can also be an important factor on the supply side and has
been studied previously, also in the setting of maternity wards (e.g. Chandra et al.,
2011; Almond and Doyle, 2011). Economic incentives can also interact with patient
characteristics: Johnson and Rehavi (2016) explore how patient knowledge interacts
with financial incentives for caesarian sections (C-sections). In particular, they find
that women with a medical degree are less likely to have a C-section, and are even less
likely to do so in health maintenance organization (HMO) hospitals, where the hospital
internalizes the additional costs of overtreatment. However, midwifes and physicians in
Norwegian maternity wards have no clear financial incentive as wards are 100% publicly
financed.
7
care systems have better outcomes compared to patients admitted to lowerspending healthcare systems. At the same time, Gowrisankaran et al.
(2017) find that skilled physicians use more resources, but these physicians
also have worse patient outcomes. Given that institutional settings, conditions, patients, and identification strategies vary across papers analyzing
the marginal return to healthcare spending, there is no strong consensus
as to how widespread wasteful spending is. In particular, the prevalence of
wasteful spending may be directly influenced by institution-specific monetary incentives, or lack thereof.
In order to identify the effect of resources on treatment decisions and
patient outcomes, it is necessary to identify exogenous shocks to resource
availability which is not a function of patient needs. Unforeseen congestion
has served this purpose in several past contributions because it is a form
of short-term strain on providers which effectively reduces the resources
available to each patient. Few parts of the healthcare system offer as good
a setting for studying the effects of crowding as the emergency department
(ED): The inflow and health status of patients vary substantially, and there
are limited options for physicians to reschedule examinations or refer patients to other institutions (e.g Evans and Kim, 2006; Gruber et al., 2018;
Woodworth, 2020). The findings from this literature vary. Evans and Kim
(2006) use variations in staffing at Californian EDs and find little or no
evidence of negative effects of congestion. However, Woodworth (2020) use
the opening of new EDs as shocks to crowding and find large reductions in
mortality when crowding is reduced.
As with EDs, most patients admitted to maternity wards are in need of
immediate care and monitoring. The influx of patients and their health status also varies considerably. For these reasons, several papers have studied
treatment decisions and outcomes in maternity wards. Freedman (2016)
analyze how bed availability in the neonatal intensive care unit affects the
likelihood that neonatals are admitted there. For identification, the author relies on short-term variations in the number of available beds at the
neonatal intensive care unit within a hospital-year-month. Using data from
California and New York, the study shows that for the sickest infants, capacity has no effect on admission probability. However, for healthier babies,
capacity has a direct impact on the probability of admission.
8
Using an identification strategy similar to Freedman (2016), a concurrent study, Maibom et al. (2020), estimates how the number of mothers
admitted to the maternity ward affects procedures and health outcomes
in Danish hospitals. The authors find that an increase in the number of
women admitted reduces the probability that the mother is exposed to medical interventions, but they find no effects on APGAR scores or longer-run
health outcomes. Marks and Choi (2019) ask whether hospital spending
affect infant health. They propose to use the number of births at hospitals as a measure for crowdedness and an instrument for spending. They
conclude that when hospitals are forced to reduce spending on newborns
due to congestion, the reduction is enforced in such a way that there is no
negative effect on newborn health. Facchini (2019) considers day-to-day
variations in the ratio of midwifes to patients in an Italian hospital and
find that during congested periods, mothers are more likely to undergo an
unscheduled c-section. The author argues that this is because c-sections are
surgical procedures performed by a surgeon and relatively more c-sections
therefore reduce the workload for midwives.
Common to much of the past literature is that identification often rely
on residual variation in congestion levels after controlling for provider and
time fixed effects. Two central underlying assumptions are that patients’
ability to sort to providers is independent of unobservable patient characteristics, and that providers have a negligible opportunity of affecting the
timing of admissions and which patients that are admitted. In contrast,
identification in this paper relies on an IV strategy which does not have to
rely on these assumptions. The application of the IV strategy constitutes
a central aspect of this paper’s contribution. The following illustrates the
challenges presented by the fixed effects in more detail, using the framework
in this paper.
First, the fixed effects framework commonly used in the literature rests
on the identifying assumption that institution fixed effects remove all crosssectional bias from patients’ allocation to providers. The assumption fails
if patient sorting depends on congestion levels at a given time and unobserved patient characteristics. Using the context of this paper as an
example, mothers choose a maternity ward for the birth. While I cannot
observe the choice of ward directly in my data, 13% of women in the sam9
ple do not give birth at the ward closest to their home. The probability of
not giving birth at the closest ward is correlated with various observable
sociodemographic variables, and women who give birth at wards further
away also experience lower levels of congestion.4 Experienced congestion
levels are therefore directly correlated with factors which are known to affect outcomes, such as education and maternal age. This is not necessarily
an issue, assuming that it is possible to control for all patient characteristics that impact patient sorting. However, this an untestable assumption,
because it is not possible to rule out the possibility that unobserved factors, such as other health conditions or complications during pregnancy,
influence where mothers end up giving birth. One could easily imagine
that deliveries that are expected to be complicated are more likely to be
diverted to a ward with less congestion, outside the catchment area. Were
this to be the case, biased estimates would show that lower congestion levels lead to more interventions and more complicated births. The sorting
of patients to providers is a general challenge in much of the literature.
As long as the choice of provider is endogenous and correlates with unobservables, controlling for providers is not sufficient to remove selection
bias.
Second, a similar issue occurs in the time dimension. One can include
time effects, for instance date of admission, but as with the provider fixed
effects, an implicit assumption is that the timing of all admissions cannot
be influenced by either patients or providers based on unobservable characteristics. This assumption fails if providers are able to affect the timing of
admission of patients based on characteristics, unobservable by the econometrician, that are correlated with both outcomes and congestion. In the
maternity ward setting, midwives and obstetricians have significant leeway in deciding the timing of births through induction, referral to other
wards, and delaying admissions. A potential consequence is that mothers
scheduled to be admitted for birth induction are not admitted due to an
unforeseen influx of mothers in active labor. If fixed effects are relied on
for identification, this could represent a challenge to identification because
birth induction is per definition less likely for women in active labor, while
mothers who are not admitted on that day are much more likely to go
4See Table A1 in the Appendix.
10
through induction at a later stage. Consequently, the estimates may not
reflect the effect of congestion on treatment provided to the same population sample, but rather the fact that congestion in itself affects which
women are admitted on a specific date. Outcomes other than induction
are also likely to be affected by this mechanism, as inductions are usually
accompanied by additional complications and medical interventions.
These challenges need not necessarily add up to a severe threat to the
validity of the results of any past contributions. There is, however, evidence
of imbalance reported in several of the contributions discussed above.5 Using an IV strategy, I am able to address all of these issues. Specifically,
my instrument for congestion effectively removes all issues stemming from
geographical sorting, as discussed in the first point. I solve issues of intertemporal sorting of mothers by using the due dates of other women rather
than admission dates. In particular, the due dates of other women are
outside the locus of control for both wards and neighbors, and therefore
not endogenous to the admission date, which solves the second issue above.
Last, I show that my instrument is uncorrelated with any parental characteristics, which is evidence that the instrument fulfills the exogeneity
criterion.
3 Institutions and data
3.1 Institutions
The Norwegian healthcare system is dominated by a single-payer system
financed by the national government. It is not possible for individuals to
fully opt out of the public healthcare system, but individuals may buy
private health insurance in addition.6 The public healthcare system is
5Maibom et al. (2020) show that parents’ income and educational levels is correlated
with their measure of crowding and a correlation between transfers and congestion in
some samples. Freedman (2016) find that both parental and newborn characteristics are
correlated with his measure available neonatal care beds. Marks and Choi (2019) find
significant differences for several socio-economic background characteristics for mothers giving birth on days characterized as “slow” and “busy”. Note that the authors in
all these studies argue that the size of the differences are too small to bear any economic significance, yet, it demonstrated that some imbalances are common in the past
literature.
6Approx. 10% of the Norwegian population is covered by some kind of private health
insurance according to Finans Norge (2019). Of these 90% are covered through their
11
organized in two tiers. The first tier consists of general practitioners (GPs),
who are contracted to a municipality. All inhabitants are initially assigned
a GP at birth or immigration, but may change to another physician up to
twice a year. Patients seeing a GP are required to pay approx. USD 20-25,
adjusted for inflation, per consultation. Additional minor co-payments are
required for blood tests etc. When the yearly sum of co-payments exceeds
a limit value (USD 250 in 2019), patients are exempt from additional copayments for the remainder of the calendar year.7
In addition to providing
diagnostic services and outpatient treatment, GPs also make referrals to
specialist healthcare services from public or private providers. As a general
rule, patients cannot consult specialists or get services at hospitals with
public funding without a referral from a GP.8
The second tier of the healthcare system consists of private specialists
contracted to the public healthcare system and public hospitals. Patients
may buy services from private specialists such as imaging services, etc.,
but without a referral from their GP, they have to pay the entire cost of
the service out-of-pocket. Inpatient services at public hospitals are free
of charge at the point of use. This includes all services related to birth.
For all inpatient health services, patients are allowed to select the institution at which they wish to receive care. Most of Norway is fairly sparsely
populated, with long distances between hospitals. On the whole, then,
the choice of institution is therefore not a relevant choice margin for most
women when it comes to childbirth. However, in Oslo expectant mothers
may choose among several institutions within a small geographical area.
In order to choose a ward, expectant mothers can fill out and submit a
form to the institution they prefer and may then be accepted or rejected
by the institution. During unforeseen congested periods wards are free to
refer expectant mothers to other institutions in the early phases of labor as
long as this does not potentially compromise the health of the child or the
mother. I address the empirical issue of selection of women to institutions
in Section 4 below.
employer.
7
Income for GPs is generated through three channels: (i) co-payments from patients;
(ii) reimbursements from the national government through the Control and Payment of
Health Reimbursement (KUHR); (iii) a fixed sum per patient on their patient list.
8The main exemption is patients who are referred for further treatment from the ED.
12
During a healthy pregnancy, the GP is the main point of contact for
expectant mothers. Expectant mothers may also choose to have regular
check-ups, where available, with a certified midwife employed by the municipality. During a normal pregnancy an expectant mother will undergo
8 antenatal check-ups before reaching her due date (helsenorge.no, 2020).
These check-ups are exempt from co-payment and include clinical tests,
scans, and conversation about health and risk behaviors. Additionally,
pregnant women will be offered an ultrasound scan by designated providers
free of charge at an approximated gestation age of 18 weeks. This ultrasound scan includes setting a final due date. Importantly, the first check-up
includes guidance on how the parents should book a midwifery unit or hospital for delivery.
3.2 Data and sample
Data for this study were collected from four sources. First, the Medical
Birth Registry of Norway (MFR) contains health and administrative data
on all births in Norway from 1967 onward. From this register I collect
several variables on the individual child’s health and procedures and interventions administered during birth.9 The register also contains identifiers
for the institution in which the mother gave birth, but does not contain the
date of the mother’s admission to the institution.10 Importantly, these data
contain the the due date for each birth as determined through ultrasound
earlier in the pregnancy.
The second source of data is the National Patient Registry of Norway
(NPR). This registry records every treatment, admission date and discharge
date for all individuals receiving inpatient treatment at a public hospital
or other providers since 2008. This registry contains almost all births in
Norway in the period.11 These data also contain the day of admission
for all mothers as well as medical codes for each procedure administered,
9Procedure and complication codes follow several different standards and include the
ICD-10/9, ATC, and complications and interventions identified from a checklist from
the birth registration form filled out at the ward.
10The MFR does contain birth date as well as number of days admitted, but these
variables are not sufficient to identify the admission date.
11Home births are not necessarily recorded, but nearly all women give birth at a ward
or en route to a ward and are then registered at a public ward shortly after delivery.
13
coded according to the ICD-10 system at the two digit level. I use these
data to calculate the number of women admitted to each institution each
day. Specifically, for each woman who gives birth, I first find the spell that
overlaps the birth date of the child and include any ICD-10 code which
refers to the birth (ICD-10 O80-O84). If no spell overlaps the date of
birth I use the closest ensuing spell that contains ICD-10 codes related to
childbirth, but restrict these to spells starting within 2 days of the birth.
Using these two rules, I identify the day of admission for 98% of the sample
between 2008 and 2014. I also use these data to identify the most common
maternity ward in each neighborhood for each prospective mother.
The third data source is the Control and Payment of Health Reimbursement, a registry over all reimbursements and payments in public healthcare.
This registry contains detailed information on each contact any individual
has with the public out-patient healthcare system. This includes date,
reason for visit and treatment, if any. Though Norway has a small and
growing private healthcare sector, nearly all treatment and contacts between patients and the healthcare system go through the public points of
service. I use these data to construct measures of healthcare utilization of
both mother and child in the years following birth.
The fourth and last source of data are the sociodemographic register
data of Statistics Norway. These include detailed data on each individual’s
education level, municipality and neighborhood of residence, labor market
data, earnings and more. First and foremost, these data allow me to include
controls in the main analyses and investigate whether the instrument is
balanced. Descriptive statistics for all variables included in the analysis
are presented in Tables A2 and A3.
In the analysis I restrict the sample to women giving birth for the first
time.12 This is because past birth outcomes may have direct impacts on
treatment given during later births. For example, women who have had Csections before are advised to avoid vaginal births later due to increased risk
of serious complications (Royal College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists,
2019). I also exclude mothers younger than 16 or older than 40 at the time
of birth. This leaves me with 148 022 births across 40 wards. Descriptive
12I show results when this restriction is relaxed in Table A11 in the Appendix.
14
Table 1. Selected descriptive statistics: Parental background and birth
statistics.
Mean Std. Dev.
Mothers admitted 11.22 7.82
Predicted mothers admitted (instrument) 11.24 8.37
Child female 0.48
Interventions and complications
Number of interventions 4.41 2.16
Number of complications 5.48 1.44
APGAR. < 7 0.02
Induction 0.22
Analgesic 0.94
Emergency C-section 0.13
Child readmitted 30 days 0.05
Paternal characteristics
Pensionable income (000’s) 447.47 322.21
Age 31.06 6.09
Married 0.18
Maternal characteristics
Pensionable income (000’s) 314.09 198.97
Age 27.95 4.80
Married 0.18
Diagnoses related to pregnancy prior to birth 3.06 5.56
Pregnancy related contacts with healthcare providers 13.92 9.51
Note: Pensionable income is CPI adjusted to 2015. Descriptive statistics for all variables are reported
in Table A2. N = 148 022.
statistics on selected variables are reported in Table 1.
13
4 Identification strategy
Establishing a causal chain from congestion to health outcomes is generally
challenging, as there are a number of unobserved factors which are likely
to influence both patient exposure to congestion on the one hand, and
treatments and health outcomes on the other. In the specific case studied
in this paper, there are several institutional factors which would warrant
concern for selection of mothers to wards and dates based on congestion.14
13See the Appendix for descriptive statistics on all variables used in the analysis.
14The structure of this section builds on the analogous section in Bhuller et al. (2020).
15
First, both mothers and wards have some possibility of influencing
where the birth will take place. In particular, mothers state their preferred maternity ward, and will give birth there provided that the ward
has capacity at the time of admission. As mothers may sort toward different wards on a number of different dimensions, this implies clear selection
issues. Second, wards are able to refuse and reroute incoming mothers
during times of unforeseen congestion. This kind of referring could bias
results both towards and away from zero. On the one hand, wards may
be more likely to re-route healthy mothers during congested periods because they are at lower risk of complications during transport. On the
other hand, there may be a greater possibility of high-risk mothers being
re-routed during congested periods if a ward does not have the capacity
to manage a complicated birth. Additionally, which ward mothers are referred to may depend on their risk level. For instance, if pregnancies are
considered at-risk at an early stage, mothers living further away from central hospitals may be admitted to these better equipped wards well ahead
of the due date to ensure that they will not be in transport at the time of
birth or give birth at smaller wards.15 Wards may also differ as to how they
assess incoming mothers and who they refer to other institutions. These
assessments may also differ over time and within the individual ward, depending on the characteristics of mothers currently admitted. Depending
on the degree of and reasons for rerouting, these mechanisms may bias
observational results either upwards or downwards. There are indications
that these mechanisms are in play also in past contributions as discussed
above.
To demonstrate the presence endogeneity problems in the data used
here, I estimate a simple OLS regression of the number of other women
admitted at the same ward and day as the focal mother against a set
of characteristics linked to the focal mother. The results are reported in
Column (1) of Table 2. Even though I include fixed effects for the due
date and local ward identifiers, there are strong and significant correlations
between several background characteristics and experienced congestion, indicating clear selection patterns. In particular, higher parental education
15In the sample, 13% of women give birth at an institution other than the one closest
to their home.
16
and maternal age are both positively correlated with congestion levels. The
imbalances are reduced, but remain also if I exchange due date and local
ward fixed effects with admission date and admitting ward-by-admission
year fixed effects. These results are reported in Table A4. This suggests
that the simple FE estimates are likely to be biased.
To handle the endogeneity issue, I use an instrumental variable strategy. In essence, I rely on inter-temporal variation in the number of women
who have the same due date within a local ward catchment area. Because
no individual mother or ward can influence the due dates of mothers in
a geographic area, the IV estimate should be free from bias due to endogenous responses to congestion. To construct the instrument, I start by
identifying the ward most commonly used in each woman’s neighborhood
and year-month. These refer to the statistical unit “grunnkrets” which is
the least aggregated geographical statistical unit in Norway, and comprises
on average 350 individuals. I then sum up the number of women in these
catchment areas by due date. I term this measure “predicted congestion”.
Deviations between observed and predicted congestion stem from women
being admitted either before or after their due date or being admitted to
other wards.
The average number of women admitted each day at a given ward is
likely to be correlated with time-invariant ward characteristics. For instance, wards in more densely populated areas are likely to have larger
wards and serve a larger patient group. The same wards may also have
different routines or leniency towards specific treatments. I therefore condition all estimates on ward fixed effects.16 I also include due date fixed
effects to account for differences over time that are common across wards.
Such differences include seasonal variation in birth numbers and the potential effects of vacations and weekends on capacity. Together, these fixed
effects net out a large fraction of ward and time effects that may affect
both congestion and the treatment of mothers.
The main question asked in this paper is whether congestion in the
maternity ward affects health outcomes for mother and child. The model
16These fixed effects are dummies for the local ward of each woman as opposed to the
ward where the birth actually takes place. The reason for this is that the ward they end
up giving birth at is not determined randomly.
17
Table 2. Background variables and experienced vs predicted congestion.
(1) (2)
Congestion: Predicted congestion:
#admitted # ˆ admitted
Father
Lower secondary -0.2520*** (0.0456) -0.0248 (0.0324)
Upper secondary -0.2572*** (0.0391) -0.0259 (0.0277)
Master’s 0.1143** (0.0580) -0.0490 (0.0405)
Age -0.0017 (0.0030) 0.0011 (0.0022)
Immigrant 0.1206** (0.0502) 0.0065 (0.0353)
ln(income) -0.0052 (0.0104) -0.0009 (0.0073)
Mother
Lower secondary 0.0188 (0.0417) 0.0137 (0.0301)
Upper secondary 0.0628* (0.0354) 0.0306 (0.0254)
Master’s 0.3358*** (0.0523) -0.0054 (0.0368)
Age 0.0242*** (0.0043) -0.0003 (0.0031)
Immigrant -0.1495*** (0.0491) 0.0009 (0.0349)
ln(income) 0.0000 (0.0095) -0.0024 (0.0068)
Child female -0.0100 (0.0268) 0.0098 (0.0192)
Observations 148 022 148 022
Dep. mean 11.22 11.24
F-statistic for joint significance 23.93 0.34
Joint p-value 0.00 0.99
Note: Column (1) shows the result of a linear regression where the dependent variable is the number of
women admitted on the same maternity ward-day as the focal mother. Parental income is transformed
using the inverse hyperbolic sine to handle zeros. In addition to the listed variables, the regression
includes due date and local ward fixed effects. Column (2) shows the same result for the instrument.
In the bottom part of the table I report the F-statistic and p-value for a test of joint significance of the
reported variables. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
applied to answer this question is formulated in Equation 1, where yihd is
the outcome (indicator for induced labor, longer-term health outcome etc.)
for woman i at ward h admitted on date d.
17 Admittedhd is the number
of women admitted to the same ward on the same day as the focal mother
is admitted. µbhare fixed effects for the mother’s local ward. due dated
is the due date fixed effects. Xi are characteristics of the mother, father
and child that are determined prior to birth. For both mother and father
these include: years of education, income and income squared one year
prior to birth, age, and immigration status. For the child, the included
17When the health of the child is the outcome, i refers to the child.
18
characteristic is the sex of the child.18
yihd = β ˆ admittedhd + µbh + η due dateid + X
0
iΞ + εihd (1)
As demonstrated by Table 2, the number of mothers admitted to a
ward on any given day is not random when conditioning on fixed effects.
It is thus likely that a simple OLS regression would yield a biased estimate of β. Acknowledging this concern, my identification strategy relies
on random variation in the congestion level caused by the number of women
with due dates on specific calendar dates within a ward catchment area,
PN
i=1 due datebhd. Summing up the number of women with the same due date
within each catchment area, I can instrument for the number of women admitted on any day and at any ward, using a first stage defined as:
admittedhd = δ
X
N
i=1
due datebhd−i + µbh + τ due dateid + XiΩ + ihd (2)
Assuming instrument exogeneity and monotonicity, the estimated 2SLS
result can be interpreted as the weighted average of the causal effect of
congestion at different levels among the subgroup of women whose exposure
to congestion is influenced by the number of women with the same due date
in the local area. In other words, the results apply to women who were
less likely to be re-routed or select to different wards or admission dates
through the mechanisms described above.
4.1 Relevance.
Figure 1 shows the identifying variation in the data and a graphical illustration of the first stage. The histogram shows the distribution of the
instrument after it has been residualized against all control variables and
the relevant fixed effects included in Equation 1. The figure shows that
after a large share of the cross-sectional and common ward inter-temporal
18One could argue that the length and weight of the child are determined before birth,
but as women who are admitted on busier days are less likely to be induced, there may be
some effects along these dimensions. I therefore choose not to include these potentially
endogenously determined variables in the regression, although they have no significant
effect on results.
19
11
12
13
14 # Admitted
0
.05
.1
.15 Density
4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
# Admîtted
Note: The histogram shows the residualized variation in the instrument (number of mothers with due
date on mother i’s admission date at her local area) after conditioning on controls and fixed effects as in
Equation 1 (top and bottom 2% excluded). The solid line shows a local linear regression of congestion
on the instrument with the 90% CI shown by dashed lines.
Figure 1. Sample variation in predicted congestion
variation in the sample has been subsumed, a policy-relevant amount of
variation remains. The mean of the predicted congestion measure (11.24)
is very close to the number admitted per institution-day on average (11.22),
and the residualized variation in the instrument is quite large: the difference between ±2 standard deviations in predicted congestion is closer to
17 admissions.19
The first stage representation plotted by the solid line shows that the
congestion level increases quite monotonically in the predicted congestion
level.20 There is some flattening and noise in the relationship at higher
19In Figure A1 I also plot the raw variation in the number of women admitted over
one calendar year to an anonymized ward, to provide some descriptive illustration of
the raw day-to-day variation of admissions at institution level.
20Note that the monotonicity assumption only requires that the first stage does not
change sign, therefore the assumption is not violated even if the strength of the first
stage weakens as illustrated in the figure.
20
Table 3. First stage estimates with various amounts of controls
(1) (2) (3)
No controls + Parental age, All controls
immig. stat., from Table
gender of child 2
#admitted ˆ 0.0958*** 0.0958*** 0.0959***
(0.0044) (0.0044) (0.0044)
F-stat. on instrument 468.66 469.84 470.97
Note: First stage estimates with variations in included controls. In addition to the listed variables,
the regressions include due date and local ward fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
predicted congestion levels, which is indicative of more frequent re-routing
during particularly congested periods.
Table 3 reports the estimated first stage with various degrees of controls. Starting from the simplest possible first stage, excluding all control
variables except due date and local ward fixed effects, Column (1) shows a
precisely estimated positive relationship between predicted and actual congestion levels. Adding additional controls does not alter the estimated first
stage in any meaningful way, with almost precisely the same F-statistic on
the instrument, far exceeding any conventional levels of relevance criteria.
The first stage estimate shows that for every additional predicted admission conditional on due date and constant local ward characteristics, the
number of women admitted increases by .1 on average.
4.2 Conditional independence.
A necessary condition for the instrumental variable approach to be valid
is that the instrument is uncorrelated with other factors affecting the outcome, i.e. that the independence assumption holds. As explained above,
this is likely to be the case once fixed effects are included. Nonetheless, it is
impossible to provide a definitive answer to the validity of the assumption.
It is, however, possible to investigate whether the instrument is balanced
across observed characteristics. I do this by regressing the predicted congestion level against a vector of observed characteristics determined well
ahead of the due date. These include parental income, education, age and
21
immigration status as well as the gender of the child. I also include due
date and local ward fixed effects as explained above. Results reported in
Column (2) of Table 2 show that there is no detectable correlation between
the instrument and any characteristic, with no coefficient being statistically different from 0. Note also that the joint explanatory power of all
characteristics is very low (p-value = 0.99).21 I consider these results to
be a strong indicator that the number of women with the same due date
within the catchment area of a ward is uncorrelated to other determinants
of child and mother outcomes.
To lend further support to this interpretation, Table 3 shows that adding
control variables to the first stage has no impact on the estimated relationship between congestion and predicted congestion. This is reassuring, because it renders it less likely that any unobserved characteristics are causing
bias to the degree they are correlated with observables.
4.3 Exclusion.
In this paper, the exclusion criterion requires that the number of women
with the same due date in a limited geographic region does not affect outcomes through any direct channel other than the number of women admitted to the same ward on the same day as the focal mother. One potential
violation of this assumption could be that wards foresee congestion ahead
of time and therefore adjust the staff on duty. Though this may be the
case to some degree, the result of such supply side behavior would most
probably attenuate any effects. In other words, if wards perfectly foresee
the number of admissions ahead of time based on the due dates of women
in the area, the wards could increase staffing to mitigate congestion effects.
Were this to be the case it would bias estimated effects towards zero. However, perfect foresight and perfect adjustment to short-term variations is
extremely unlikely. First, only 60% of newborns in the sample are born on
the admission day, and only 12% are admitted ±1 day from their due date.
Second, midwifes and physicians generally have contracts limiting working
hours and regulate the number of hours that have to pass between each
shift and the number of days it is allowed to work over time, making it
21The balancing test is robust to including pregnancy related diagnoses and contact
with health care providers during pregnancy as explanatory variables.
22
difficult to manage staffing to perfectly adapt to admissions.
4.4 Monotonicity.
Assuming that the causal effect of congestion is constant across mothers,
the instrument need only to satisfy the independence and exclusion criteria.
If, however, the effect of congestion is heterogeneous, then the additional
assumption of monotonicity is required in order to interpret the IV estimates as an average of the local average treatment effects across various
congestion levels.22 In the setting studied in this paper, the implication of
the assumption is that no mother would experience a lower congestion level
should the predicted congestion level increase. One way to assess the credibility of this assumption is to examine whether there are sub-populations
for which the instrument changes sign in the first stage. I pursue this
option by first estimating the predicted congestion level for each mother,
using only the control variables and fixed effects listed above. Then I divide
the sample into quartiles, from lowest estimated congestion propensity to
highest. Next, I estimate the first stage for each of these sub-samples, and
their reverse, leading to a total of eight separate first stages. The results
from this exercise are reported in Table A5. For each of these first stages
the instrument remains precise and positive, though gradually weakening
toward the most extreme congestion propensities. This latter point is also
visually demonstrated in the gradual flattening of the first stage slope in
Figure 1.
5 Results
5.1 Effects on birth outcomes
I begin by considering outcomes for children and mothers who are measured
during or shortly after birth. Reduced form estimates are reported in Table
A6 and illustrated in Figures A2 and A3.
The birth records contain a multitude of complications and interventions at a highly detailed level. As a more aggregated measure of treatment
22There will be a local average treatment effect for mothers who are shifted from being
admitted the same day as 7 to 8 mothers, from 8 to 9 and so on. The reported estimates
will be an average of these effects.
23
intensity and as a starting point, I report the estimated effects on the number of interventions in Column (1) in Table 4. The results indicate that
the total number of interventions falls by about 10% when the number of
admitted mothers increases by 10.
One of the major interventions it is relevant to analyze is the probability
of the birth being induced. Inductions are usually performed when the
mother is well into post-term pregnancy (defined as gestation age exceeding
14 days beyond the due date), or if there is some other risk to the child’s
or mother’s health (The Norwegian Medical Association, 2014). The effect
of induction on maternal health and perinatal outcomes is unclear, as solid
evidence is lacking. However, a recent literature survey on the effects of
induction among low-risk mothers found that the procedure has little effect
on child health, though there may be a positive effect on APGAR scores and
reductions in the probability of an emergency C-section being performed
(Middleton P, 2018; Grobman et al., 2018). When a birth is induced it
may take hours or days before the birth transitions into the active phase
with contractions. During periods with more admitted mothers, the staff
at a maternity ward can avoid intensifying the workload by choosing not
to induce additional births. Induced labor is quite common and occurs in
about 20% of the births in the sample.
Column (2) in Table 4 shows that every additional mother arriving at
the maternity ward the same day as the focal mother reduces the probability of induction by 1 percentage point, and a one standard deviation
increase in congestion reduces the probability by more than a third of the
sample mean. One way of interpreting this result is that health personnel
on the ward take active measures to regulate congestion: by refraining from
inducing births during hectic periods they effectively reduce the congestion
level in the short-term. If obstetricians and midwifes perceive more hectic
periods as potentially harmful for patients, this behavior is in line with
maximizing the expected health level of patients post-partum. An alternative hypothesis, which cannot be ruled out by the results, is that physicians
and midwives provide more interventions as long as there is spare capacity.
This would imply that the same amount of resources on a ward, such as
time and equipment, is simply divided among a larger number of patients
during more congested periods.
24
During most births, women receive some kind of pain relief. In the analysis sample, 94% receive an analgesic, including epidural.23 The types and
amounts of drugs administered depend on pre-existing conditions, complications and the wishes of the patients (Royal College of Obstetricians &
Gynaecologists, 2015). Analgesics comprise a wide range of drugs, from relatively mild to stronger drugs used only in critical situations (Royal College
of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists, 2015). The effects of analgesics on the
health of both mother and child are subject to debate. Some studies find
effects on the fetal heart rate and the probability of emergency C-sections,
while others find no adverse effects (Eltzschig et al., 2003). Results, reported in column (3), suggest that there is a 3% reduction in the use of
analgesic drugs when congestion increases by one standard deviation.24
According to Norwegian medical guidelines, an emergency C-section
can only be performed after a medical assessment deems it the proper
treatment due to unforeseen and acute threats to the health of the mother
or the child such as pre-eclampsia. However, the wish of the mother should
be taken into account during the assessment (Helse Stavanger, 2019). If
physicians rely strictly on the medical assessment of the health conditions
of mother and child, one would not expect congestion to have any effect on
the prevalence of emergency C-sections. The results in Column (4) show
that the C-section rate is completely unaffected by the congestion level,
suggesting that emergency C-sections are only performed when medically
necessary and independently of congestion.
In the final two columns I report results for two indicators of newborn
health. The APGAR score is a commonly used measure of children’s health
outcomes shortly after birth, and is set by a midwife based on a set of
predetermined criteria on a checklist. 94% of newborns receive a score of 8
or higher. In past research the score has been shown to negatively correlate
with long-term cognitive ability and a score below 7 has long been used as
an indicator for poor newborn health (Stuart et al., 2011; Ehrenstein et al.,
2009; Casey et al., 2001). Column (5) shows that children born during more
congested periods are less likely to receive an APGAR score of less than 7:
23Analgesics are defined as medicines used with an ATC code starting with N02.
24In Table A7 in the Appendix I also show results for anestethics, and also for epidural
as a specific type of analgesic.
25
a one standard deviation increase in congestion reduces the probability of
a child receiving an APGAR score of less than 7 by about 60%, though the
estimate is significant only at the 10% level. The exact size of the effect
is therefore rather uncertain, but it suggests that children born during
more hectic periods are at least no worse off. One reason for a positive
effect on children’s health may be that some of the interventions that are
less used during congested periods are marginally harmful for the child.
However, these very same interventions may be perceived by the medical
staff as marginally health improving, leading to overtreatment of mothers
with negative effects on neonatal health.
About 5% of the newborns in the sample are readmitted within the
first 30 days after birth. The most common causes are feeding problems,
respiratory distress, and jaundice, and increasing readmission rates have
been related to insufficient monitoring after birth (Young et al., 2013). In
Column (6) I estimate that children born during more congested periods
are significantly less likely to be readmitted within in their first month of
life. In Table A8 in the Appendix, I show that readmission rates are also
lower the first week of life. This evidence suggests that treatment given to
women during less congested periods may actually have detrimental effects
on children in the earliest part of their life.
I report results for some additional outcomes in Appendix Table A8.
These results show that congestion has no impact on length of stay, and
women admitted on more congested days are no more likely to suffer from
severe lacerations or severe hemorrhages. The frequency of both severe
lacerations and severe hemorrhages are considered to be affected by staff
through active monitoring and are registered in the medical birth registry.
Mothers admitted on more congested days are also no more likely to be
readmitted in the first 7 or 30 days after childbirth of be registered with
more complications. These results support the conclusion from the main
results that the interventions foregone during congested periods have no
detectable effects on health.
In the appendix I challenge the main results in several ways. First,
I show that estimates are nearly identical when I remove all individual
level controls in Table A9, supporting the IV assumptions. Results also
remain qualitatively similar when I remove Oslo, the only city with mul26
tiple wards, from the sample in Table A10. In the main sample I exclude
women who have previously given birth. I show results for these mothers
in Table A11.
25 These results show that mothers who have given birth
previously are similarly affected in terms of the number of interventions,
labor inductions and the use of analgesics, but are less likely to undergo
emergency c-sections during congested periods. There is also no detectable
effect on APGAR score or readmissions. There are several reasons for why
these differences may occur, but these are hard to test in the data. First,
having gone through a birth previously gives the staff much more information on risk factors. For instance, successful past vaginal deliveries may
make staff more reluctant to perform emergency c-sections, and in particular during congested periods. Second, the mother herself is likely to have
other expectations and needs than a first-time mother. Having experience
as a parent may reduce the impact of congestion on the probability of later
readmissions.
The main results are estimated on a model where congestion is measured
as the number of admitted women after netting out local ward and due date
fixed effects. There is substantial heterogeneity in terms of the size of wards
in the sample, and it is not given that smaller and larger wards are equally
affected by one additional admitted patient. I explore this possibility by
estimating separate effects for the largest (≥ 90th percentile) wards and
the remaining wards in Table A13.
26 These results show that larger wards
are able to mitigate most effects of congestion on treatment intensity and
there is no evidence that congestion leads to better child health outcomes.
For smaller wards, the opposite is true. The most likely explanation for
this is that an additional admission at a large ward has a relatively smaller
impact on congestion as these have higher admission numbers on average.
Finally, I estimate models where I scale congestion to the admission
numbers at the ward level. Specifically, I measure actual and predicted
admissions on each day and ward as the centile of the maximum number
of admissions observed at the ward in the period covered by the data. Using this measure of congestion instead of the number of admissions gives a
25Note that all mothers, regardless of age, parity and so on, are included when constructing the instrument and the endogenous variable.
26By splitting at the 90th percentile the number of observations in both groups remain
roughly similar.
27
Table 4. Main results.
(1) (2) (3)
N Ind. Analgesic
interv. labor
#admitted ˆ -0.0418*** -0.0101*** -0.0033*
(0.0151) (0.0032) (0.0017)
Dep. mean 4.41 0.22 0.94
(4) (5) (6)
Emg. APGAR < 7 Child
C-section readmitted
#admitted ˆ -0.0002 -0.0016* -0.0038**
(0.0025) (0.0009) (0.0015)
Dep. mean 0.13 0.02 0.05
Note: Results from estimating Equation 1 using 2SLS. Outcomes are defined in column titles. Each
coefficient is estimated in a separate regression. Each regression includes controls for parents age,
education, earnings and immigration status as well as the gender of the child and due date and local
ward fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. F-statistic first stage = 471.
substantially smaller first stage and consequently less presicion, but qualitatively similar results as reported in Table A14.
Overall, the main results can be summarized as two general findings:
first, mothers who are admitted on busy days receive fewer interventions
than mothers on less busy days and have the same number of complications.
Second, the children born to the former are healthier, measured by APGAR
score and readmission rates, than comparable children born on less busy
days. This implies that at least some of the treatments women receive due
to being admitted on slow days have no beneficial effect on child health
outcomes.
A central question in assessing the validity of these results, is whether
the reporting itself is affect by congestion. One could imagine that midwives and physicians prioritize tending to patients rather than reporting
complications and treatments during stressful situations, which could cause
some of the patterns in the data. This could for example affect the APGAR score: During congested periods midwives may have less time to
assess the health of neonatals to find defects or imperfections, and might
28
assign higher APGAR scores as a result. However, it seems very unlikely
that the reporting of major interventions such as induction of labor or use
of strong medications should be affected in this manner. Further, readmission rates cannot be directly affected by this kind of reporting behavior.
Nonetheless, it must be acknowledged that reporting behavior may affect
some outcomes.
5.1.1 Comparison with OLS To illustrate the importance of using an IV
strategy, I report the results of an OLS specification in Table 5. Here I replace due date fixed effects with admission date fixed effects, and local ward
fixed effects with admitting ward-by-admission year fixed effects. There are
clear differences from the IV results. In particular, the OLS results suggest that the number of interventions a woman experiences is unaffected
while the induction rate increases. The OLS results also find no effect
on APGAR or readmissions. Jointly with the balance test for the OLS
specification reported in Table A4 it appears that there is enough spatial
or temporal sorting of women to different congestion levels that the OLS
results in these data are biased to an extent that results are significantly
affected.
An alternative explanation for the differences is that the mothers complying with the instrument differ from those in the overall sample population. That is, the women whose experienced congestion is predictable
by the number of women in the local area with due date on the mother’s
admission date, may not be similar to other women. In other words, the
effects estimated of compliers to the instrument cannot be extrapolated to
non-compliers that are included in the OLS estimations. To assess whether
this may be driving the differences between OLS and IV estimates, I characterize compliers in Table A12 following Bhuller et al. (2020). I start by
estimating a propensity for congestion by regressing experienced congestion
against all observable characteristics included in the main analysis (excluding the instrument). I then split the sample into quartiles based on this
propensity and re-run the first stage separately for each sub-sample. The
estimated first stage coefficients are reported in the first rows in Column
(1) of Table A12. The next columns report the standard deviation of the
estimates along with the population shares and the relative size of the first
29
Table 5. OLS conditional on admitting ward, admission date, and
admitting-ward-by-admission-year
(1) (2) (3)
N Ind. Analgesic
interv. labor
#admitted -0.0019 0.0019*** -0.0007***
(0.0014) (0.0003) (0.0002)
Dep. mean 4.41 0.22 0.94
(4) (5) (6)
Emg. APGAR < 7 Child
C-section readmitted
#admitted 0.0002 0.0000 -0.0002
(0.0002) (0.0001) (0.0002)
Dep. mean 0.13 0.02 0.05
Note: Outcomes defined in column titles. Each regression includes controls for parental age, education,
earnings and immigration status as well as the gender of the child and admission date and admittingward-by-admission-year fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
stage compared to the one estimated on the full sample. Focusing on the
latter, it is clear that the size of the first stage estimate relative to that of
the full sample is very similar across each sub-sample. The estimates in the
next rows show results when the sample is split by each observable characteristic included in the main analysis. Overall, there is little evidence that
any sub-population has substantially different compliance, which suggests
that heterogeneity does not explain the large differences between the OLS
and IV estimates.
Research similar to the current paper have generally found that there
are fewer interventions during more congested periods, and a similar conclusion can be drawn from the results presented here (Maibom et al., 2020;
Freedman, 2016; Marks and Choi, 2019). However, the comparison between the main results in Table 4 and the OLS results in 5 highlight the
potential shortcomings of relying on residualized admission numbers when
estimating congestion effects. First, using the similar fixed effects as the
past literature, I find similar correlations between parental background
characteristics and congestion as reported in Table A4. Then, estimating
30
the effect of congestion on interventions and health outcomes I find a very
limited effect on outcomes which is in line with the conclusion in Maibom
et al. (2020) and Marks and Choi (2019). However, when instrumenting
for congestion and removing spatial and temporal patient sorting, I find a
much clearer and positive effect of congestion on health outcomes, which
seems to be cluttered by temporal and spatial sorting in the simpler OLS
specification. Therefore, while the results in this paper cannot comment
directly on the validity of using residualized admission numbers as an exogenous source for congestion, they caution a strict causal interpretation
of consequent results.
5.1.2 Triage and maternal characteristics The fact that women admitted during more congested periods on average undergo fewer interventions
may veil heterogeneous effects due to triage: physicians and midwifes may
reduce the intensity of medical interventions for healthier women, while
maintaining the same intensity of care for at-risk pregnancies. I cannot
identify which pregnancies are considered at-risk by the healthcare personnel from the data. However, a possible approach to testing for triage is to
rely on past observed pregnancy-related contacts with health services and
related diagnoses. The underlying assumption is then that past healthcare
utilization during pregnancy provides a proxy for mother and child health
and risk factors during birth.
In order to identify pregnancy-related contacts with healthcare providers,
I sum all contacts the mother had with inpatient and outpatient healthcare
providers which can be categorized as pregnancy-related.27 For diagnoses,
I sum all pregnancy-related diagnoses made during the same contacts.28
Examples of pregnancy-related diagnoses are pregnancy-related hypertension or pregnancy-induced diabetes. Note that not all contacts lead to a
specific diagnosis and some contacts may result in several diagnoses, and
if so I count these as a single diagnosis.
To test for triage I re-estimate the baseline model separately for women
above and below the median number of contacts and diagnoses. The results
27These are ICPC-2 codes starting with W and ICD-10 codes O10-16; O20-29; O30-36;
Z34-35.
28These are ICPC-2 codes A94; W3-5; W28-29; W70-76; W80-81; W84-85, and ICD10 codes O10-16, O20-29, O30-39, Z35.
31
for diagnoses (contacts) are reported in Table 6 (A15). Both sets of results
indicate that there is limited, if any, triage based on these proxies of at-risk
pregnancies with women who are likely to be at higher risk being more
affected by congestion. One explanation for this finding could be that
mothers with more diagnoses and/or contacts are more exposed to defensive
medicine at the baseline. That is, mothers with higher levels of health care
utilization prior to birth are more likely to receive treatments with little
or no marginal health benefit during birth. Using random variations in
capacity at public health clinics, Harris et al. (2019) find that nurses appear
to prioritize tasks to maintain the quality of services when time constrained.
An implication of their finding for this study could be that midwifes reduce
their effort towards defensive medicine for at-risk births, but limit effects of
congestion on effective interventions. This is also suggested by the fact that
interventions are only reduced for mothers who are assumed to be at risk,
and this from a higher baseline level, while the same group also experience
a positive effect on readsmission. In sum, it is therefore not possible to rule
out effective triage using the data available in this study.
Existing literature has shown that patient characteristics influence the
interventions the patients receive (Grytten et al., 2013; Johnson and Rehavi, 2016). For instance, Johnson and Rehavi (2016) show that physician mothers are less likely to undergo C-sections than comparable nonphysicians, and that most of this effect cannot be explained by sorting. In
addition to medical knowledge, one can also imagine that the treatment
patients receive in the maternity ward is, at least to some degree, the result of a form of negotiation between the patient and healthcare personnel.
For instance, a mother may ask for pain-relief such as an epidural, while
the obstetrician is reluctant to fulfill this request based on his evaluation
of patient needs. In cases like this, the bargaining power of the mother is
likely to be stronger if her partner is present and can put additional pressure on the obstetrician to comply. Though it is not possible to identify the
bargaining power of either physicians or patients, I provide results showing
that mothers who have a registered partner are less affected by congestion
in Table 7.
29 The results show that, overall, women who have a partner are
29Note that I cannot observe whether or not the partner is present at any stage during
labor. I therefore define “married” as the mother being registered with the father as a
32
less affected by congestion. These results indicate that patient bargaining
power has an impact on interventions, yet other mechanisms may be at
play. For instance, midwives and obstetricians may treat mothers differently depending on their marital status, regardless of the partner being
present in the maternity ward.
partner in administrative registries prior to labor.
33
Table 6. Results by pregnancy-related issues diagnosed during pregnancy.
(1) (2) (3)
N Ind. Analgesic
interv. labor
Not diagnosed with #admitted ˆ -0.0320 -0.0089 -0.0051
pregnancy-related issue (0.0281) (0.0055) (0.0036)
Dep. mean 4.28 0.16 0.94
Diagnosed with #admitted ˆ -0.0620** -0.0150** -0.0009
pregnancy-related issue (0.0294) (0.0064) (0.0029)
Dep. mean 4.64 0.28 0.95
(4) (5) (6)
Emg. APGAR < 7 Child
C-section readmitted
Not diagnosed with #admitted ˆ -0.0021 -0.0024 -0.0012
pregnancy-related issue (0.0044) (0.0017) (0.0026)
Dep. mean 0.10 0.01 0.04
Diagnosed with #admitted ˆ 0.0025 -0.0014 -0.0060**
pregnancy-related issue (0.0050) (0.0018) (0.0030)
Dep. mean 0.16 0.02 0.06
Note: Median number of diagnoses set during pregnancy is 2. F-stat for women not diagnosed during
pregnancy = 124 (N = 58 004), F-stat for women diagnosed during pregnancy = 143 (N = 68 712).
Outcomes defined in column titles. Each estimate is from a separate regression and includes controls
for parental age, education, earnings and immigration status as well as the gender of the child and due
date and local ward fixed effects. See the Appendix for the definition of diagnoses coded as pregnancy
related-issues. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
34
Table 7. Results by marital status
(1) (2) (3)
N Ind. Analgesic
interv. labor
Unmarried #admitted ˆ -0.0563*** -0.0101*** -0.0035*
(0.0170) (0.0036) (0.0020)
Dep. mean 4.40 0.22 0.94
Married #admitted ˆ -0.0037 -0.0101 -0.0025
(0.0343) (0.0073) (0.0038)
Dep. mean 4.49 0.24 0.94
(4) (5) (6)
Emg. APGAR < 7 Child
C-section readmitted
Unmarried #admitted ˆ -0.0009 -0.0021** -0.0039**
(0.0028) (0.0010) (0.0017)
Dep. mean 0.13 0.02 0.05
Married #admitted ˆ 0.0059 0.0002 -0.0033
(0.0060) (0.0022) (0.0033)
Dep. mean 0.15 0.02 0.05
Note: F-stat. unmarried = 378 (N = 121 867), F-stat married = 93 (N = 26 130). Outcomes defined in
column titles. Each regression includes controls for parental age, education, earnings and immigration
status as well as the gender of the child, due date fixed effects and ward fixed effects. Robust standard
errors in parentheses.
35
5.1.3 Longer-term outcomes In this section I focus on longer-term health
outcomes for mother and child.30 To identify health outcomes, I measure
various forms of healthcare used for mother and child when the child is
1, 2 and 3 years old. Outpatient treatments are measured as visits to a
registered GP, while inpatient treatment is defined as visits to public hospitals. Effects are reported by age in panels A-C in Table 8. Starting with
treatments for the child, it appears that the negative effect of congestion on
readmission rates the first 30 days is mirrored in the hospitalization rates
during the first 2 years of life. Thus, children born during more congested
periods are no less healthy than those born during less congested periods.
Postpartum depression has received significant public attention and has
also been the focus of recent contributions in the economics literature (Persson and Rossin-Slater, 2019). Following birth, a non-negligible share of
women go through a period with depression which may hinder optimal
care for the child, with potential negative effects on child development.
Considering that the women admitted on hectic days receive less treatment, they may be more likely to experience birth as a negative event,
which may increase the their probability of developing postpartum depression. On the other hand, one might imagine that women who give birth
with fewer interventions, such as induction and emergency C-section, have
shorter restitution periods and therefore experience birth as a more positive event. I therefore estimate the utilization of psychologists as well as
overall outpatient and inpatient interventions for the mother. The results
are reported in columns (3) - (5) in Table 8. Overall, the results show
that mothers giving birth during more congested periods have the same
utilization rates of all these services as other mothers. Because the utilization rates of medical services do not necessarily reflect mothers’ health
status, I also include one additional measure of maternal health outcomes:
sick leave. Sick leave for longer periods (> 3 days) is prescribed by GPs
or physicians at hospitals and triggers sickness pay from the government.
Workers can take shorter periods of sick leave without any loss of income.
The results show no evidence that sick leave is affected by congestion except a small effect three years after birth which is significant at the 10%
30There are no effects on 30-day and 1-year mortality rates for children. Results
available upon request.
36
Table 8. Longer-term outcomes.
Panel A Child age 1
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
GP, Hosp. GP, Hosp. Psych. Sick leave,
child child mother mother mother days
#admitted ˆ -0.0012 -0.0444** -0.0088 0.0092 -0.0021 -0.1455
(0.0028) (0.0202) (0.0336) (0.0176) (0.0097) (0.3342)
Dep. mean 0.10 1.68 4.69 1.26 0.05 11.97
Panel B Child age 2
#admitted ˆ -0.0027 -0.0386** -0.0018 0.0208 0.0104 0.5594
(0.0051) (0.0181) (0.0466) (0.0251) (0.0124) (0.4041)
Dep. mean 0.32 0.98 6.33 1.89 0.09 24.18
Panel C Child age 3
#admitted ˆ 0.0062 0.0100 -0.0633 0.0027 0.0127 0.7938*
(0.0048) (0.0175) (0.0488) (0.0278) (0.0142) (0.4571)
Dep. mean 0.28 0.94 6.93 2.35 0.10 31.51
Note: Each coefficient is estimated in a separate regression. The outcome “GP” measures the
number of primary care physician visits registered for the individual child or mother in each year of
life of the child. The outcome “Hosp.” is constructed similarly but measure hospital visits. The
outcome “Psych.” is the number of registered visits with certified therapists for the mother. Each
regression includes controls for parents’ age, education, earnings and immigration status as well as the
gender of the child and due date and local ward fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
level only.
6 Discussion
The reasons for differential utilization of healthcare across individuals with
equal access remains an unanswered question. An expanding literature considers the extent to which supply side incentives, personnel and resource
scarcity are part of these causes. In the maternity ward setting, past studies have shown that women are more likely to have an unplanned C-section
if they are in labor at night than during the day due to physicians leisure
requirements (Costa-Ram´on et al., 2018), and that congestion impacts the
37
provision of interventions (Maibom et al., 2020; Freedman, 2016; Marks
and Choi, 2019; Facchini, 2019). This paper uses an instrumental variable
approach to resolve threats to identification present in some past contributions. I show that when the relative resources available to women in labor
are reduced due to more women giving birth in the same ward, they experience fewer and less invasive interventions. I cannot detect any negative
health effects in the long-term for either mother or child. Rather, children
born during more congested periods seem to have higher APGAR scores
and are less likely to be readmitted, which suggests positive health effects
for the neonatals, and overtreatment
Comparing results from the IV-specification with an OLS estimate that
include fixed effects for admission date and admitting ward-by-admission
year I find meaningful differences and I also find evidence of violations of
the identifying assumptions in the OLS approach. I emphasize that these
findings do not imply that there is significant bias in the discussed literature
and do not speak directly to the findings and methods of past contributions,
but caution against the general validity of estimates on congestion effects in
health care relying on conditional independence after controlling for fixed
effects.
The results in this paper indicate that there is some degree of overtreatment, or at least treatment with zero or negligible effects, of women during
less congested periods. The implication of this finding is that when resources are available, there will be additional interventions, even when the
intervention is unnecessary or even potentially harmful. Overall, it appears
that a policy which reduces spare capacity from the current level in these
data will have no negative effects on mother or child.
38
References
Almond, D. and Doyle, J. J. (2011). After midnight: A regression discontinuity design in length of postpartum hospital stays. American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 3(3):1–34.
Bhuller, M., Dahl, G. B., Løken, K. V., and Mogstad, M. (2020). Incarceration, recidivism, and employment. Journal of Political Economy,
128(4):1269–1324.
Casey, B. M., McIntire, D. D., and Leveno, K. J. (2001). The continuing
value of the apgar score for the assessment of newborn infants. New
England Journal of Medicine, 344(7):467–471. PMID: 11172187.
Chandra, A., Cutler, D., and Song, Z. (2011). Who ordered that? the
economics of treatment choices in medical care. In Handbook of health
economics, volume 2, pages 397–432. Elsevier.
Costa-Ram´on, A. M., Rodr´ıguez-Gonz´alez, A., Serra-Burriel, M., and
Campillo-Artero, C. (2018). It’s about time: Cesarean sections and
neonatal health. Journal of health economics, 59:46–59.
Doyle, J. J. (2011). Returns to local-area health care spending: evidence
from health shocks to patients far from home. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(3):221–43.
Doyle J., J. J., Graves, J. A., Gruber, J., and Kleiner, S. A. (2015). Measuring returns to hospital care: Evidence from ambulance referral patterns.
Journal of Political Economy, 123(1):170–214.
Ehrenstein, V., Pedersen, L., Grijota, M., Nielsen, G. L., Rothman, K. J.,
and Sørensen, H. T. (2009). Association of apgar score at five minutes
with long-term neurologic disability and cognitive function in a prevalence study of danish conscripts. BMC pregnancy and childbirth, 9(1):1–
7.
Eltzschig, H. K., Lieberman, E. S., and Camann, W. R. (2003). Regional
anesthesia and analgesia for labor and delivery. New England Journal of
Medicine, 348(4):319–332. PMID: 12540646.
39
Evans, W. N. and Kim, B. (2006). Patient outcomes when hospitals experience a surge in admissions. Journal of Health Economics, 25(2):365 –
388.
Facchini, G. (2019). Low staffing in the maternity ward: Keep calm and
call the surgeon. Working paper.
Finans Norge (2019). Statistikk - behandlingsforsikring. https://www.
finansnorge.no/statistikk/skadeforsikring/helseforsikring/
behandlingsforsikring/ [Accessed: 14.11.2019].
Finkelstein, A., Gentzkow, M., and Williams, H. (2016). Sources of geographic variation in health care: Evidence from patient migration. The
quarterly journal of economics, 131(4):1681–1726.
Freedman, S. (2016). Capacity and utilization in health care: The effect of
empty beds on neonatal intensive care admission. American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 8(2):154–85.
Godøy, A. and Huitfeldt, I. (2019). Regional variation in health care utilization and mortality. Technical report.
Gowrisankaran, G., Joiner, K. A., and L´eger, P.-T. (2017). Physician practice style and healthcare costs: Evidence from emergency departments.
Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Grobman, W. A., Rice, M. M., Reddy, U. M., Tita, A. T., Silver, R. M.,
Mallett, G., Hill, K., Thom, E. A., El-Sayed, Y. Y., Perez-Delboy, A.,
et al. (2018). Labor induction versus expectant management in low-risk
nulliparous women. New England Journal of Medicine, 379(6):513–523.
Gruber, J., Hoe, T. P., and Stoye, G. (2018). Saving lives by tying hands:
The unexpected effects of constraining health care providers. Working
Paper 24445, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Grytten, J., Skau, I., and Sørensen, R. (2013). Do mothers decide?
the impact of preferences in healthcare. Journal of Human Resources,
48(1):142–168.
40
Harris, M. C., Liu, Y., and McCarthy, I. (2019). Capacity constraints and
the provision of public services: The case of workers in public health
clinics. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Helse Stavanger (2019). Keisersnitt. helse-stavanger.no/
behandlinger/keisersnitt [Accessed: 14.11.2019].
helsenorge.no (2020). Check-ups during pregnancy. https://www.
helsenorge.no/en/pregnancy-and-maternity-care-in-norway/
check-ups-during-pregnancy/ [Accessed: 15.10.2020].
Johnson, E. M. and Rehavi, M. M. (2016). Physicians treating physicians:
Information and incentives in childbirth. American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 8(1):115–41.
Maibom, J., Sivertsen, H. H., Simonsen, M., and Wust, M. (2020). Maternity ward crowding, procedure use and child health. Journal of Health
Economics, Fortcoming.
Marks, M. and Choi, M. K. (2019). Baby boomlets and baby health:
Hospital crowdedness, hospital spending, and infant health. American
Journal of Health Economics, 5(3):376–406.
Middleton P, Shepherd E, C. C. (2018). Induction of labour for improving
birth outcomes for women at or beyond term. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews, 5.
Molitor, D. (2018). The evolution of physician practice styles: evidence
from cardiologist migration. American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 10(1):326–56.
Persson, P. and Rossin-Slater, M. (2019). When dad can stay home: Fathers’ workplace flexibility and maternal health. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Royal College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists (2015). The management
of third- and fourth-degree perineal tears. https://www.rcog.org.
uk/globalassets/documents/guidelines/gtg-29.pdf [Accessed:
17.12.2019].
41
Royal College of Obstetricians & Gynaecologists (2019). Birth after
previous caesarean birth, green-top guideline no. 45. https://www.
rcog.org.uk/globalassets/documents/guidelines/gtg_45.pdf
[Accessed: 25.11.2019].
Skinner, J. (2011). Chapter two - causes and consequences of regional
variations in health care. In Pauly, M. V., Mcguire, T. G., and Barros,
P. P., editors, Handbook of Health Economics, volume 2 of Handbook of
Health Economics, pages 45 – 93. Elsevier.
Stuart, A., Olausson, P. O., and K¨allen, K. (2011). Apgar scores at 5
minutes after birth in relation to school performance at 16 years of age.
Obstetrics & Gynecology, 118(2):201–208.
The Norwegian Medical Association (2014). Veileder
i fødselshjelp 2014. https://beta.legeforeningen.
no/contentassets/9c5011955cc644a595cec42c01934c92/
veileder-i-fodselshjelp-2014.pdf [Accessed: 17.12.2019].
Wennberg, J. E. (2010). Tracking medicine: a researcher’s quest to understand health care. Oxford University Press.
Woodworth, L. (2020). Swamped: Emergency department crowding and
patient mortality. Journal of Health Economics, 70:102279.
Young, P. C., Korgenski, K., and Buchi, K. F. (2013). Early readmission of
newborns in a large health care system. Pediatrics, 131(5):e1538–e1544.
42
A Appendix
A.1 Additional results
43
Table A1. Mothers’ use of alternative wards and background characteristics
Birth in less common ward #admitted
Father lower secondary schooling -0.0153*** -0.2866***
(0.0029) (0.0452)
Father upper secondary schooling -0.0102*** -0.2802***
(0.0024) (0.0386)
Father Master’s degree -0.0002 0.1139**
(0.0033) (0.0566)
Father’s age 0.0000 -0.0016
(0.0002) (0.0030)
Father is immigrant 0.0003 0.1213**
(0.0030) (0.0495)
ln(father’s income) -0.0060*** -0.0188*
(0.0007) (0.0103)
Mother lower secondary schooling -0.0095*** -0.0027
(0.0027) (0.0415)
Mother upper secondary schooling -0.0005 0.0616*
(0.0022) (0.0352)
Mother Master’s degree -0.0060** 0.3221***
(0.0030) (0.0511)
Mother’s age -0.0010*** 0.0220***
(0.0003) (0.0043)
Mother is immigrant -0.0169*** -0.1878***
(0.0029) (0.0484)
ln(mother’s income) -0.0066*** -0.0148
(0.0006) (0.0094)
Child female -0.0006 -0.0114
(0.0017) (0.0265)
-2.2623***
(0.0732)
Observations 148 022 148 022
F-statistic 24.3 11.22
Dep. mean 0.13 100.55
Note: Column (1) shows estimated results from a regression of a dummy indicating that the mother
was admitted to a hospital other than the most commonly used in her area. Column (2) shows the
estimated results from a regression of the number of women admitted the same day as the focal mother
against background characteristics as well a dummy indicating that the mother was admitted to a
hospital other than the most commonly used in her area. In addition to listed variables, the regression
includes due date and local ward fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
44
Table A2. Descriptive statistics: Parental background and birth statistics.
Mean Std. Dev. Obs
Mothers admitted 11.22 7.82 148 022
Predicted mothers admitted (instrument) 11.24 8.37 148 022
Weight (gr) 3447.51 536.36 148 022
Length (cm) 50.00 2.46 144 333
Child female 0.48 0.50 148 045
Interventions and complications
Number of interventions 4.41 2.16 148 022
Number of complications 5.48 1.44 148 022
APGAR. < 7 0.02 0.13 148 022
Induction 0.22 0.42 148 022
Analgesic 0.94 0.24 148 022
Emergency C-section 0.13 0.34 148 022
Child readmitted 30 days 0.05 0.22 148 022
Paternal characteristics
Pensionable income 447.47 322.21 148 022
Age 31.06 6.09 148 022
Immigrant 0.18 0.38 148 022
Lower secondary schooling 0.27 0.44 148 022
Upper secondary schooling 0.39 0.49 148 022
Bachelor’s degree 0.22 0.41 148 022
Master’s degree 0.12 0.33 148 022
Married 0.18 0.38 148 022
Maternal characteristics
Pensionable income 314.09 198.97 148 022
Age 27.95 4.80 148 022
Immigrant 0.19 0.39 148 022
Lower secondary schooling 0.24 0.43 148 022
Upper secondary schooling 0.27 0.44 148 022
Bachelor’s degree 0.36 0.48 148 022
Master’s degree 0.13 0.34 148 022
Married 0.18 0.38 148 022
Diagnoses related to pregnancy prior to birth 3.57 5.85 126 760
Pregnancy-related contacts prior to birth 16.26 8.22 126 760
Note: There are fewer observations for healthcare utilization prior to birth because there are no
inpatient health data in 2007
45
Table A3. Descriptive statistics: Health outcomes by child age.
Mean Sd Obs
Age child 1 year
GP visits, child 0.10 0.39 148 022
Hospital visits, child 1.68 2.88 148 022
GP visits, mother 4.69 5.24 148 022
Hospital visits, mother 1.26 2.46 148 022
Visits to mental healthcare providers, mother 0.05 1.13 148 022
Sick leave, mother 11.98 44.85 148 022
Age child 2 years
GP visits, child 0.32 0.71 148 022
Hospital visits, child 0.98 2.38 148 022
GP visits, mother 6.33 6.99 148 022
Hospital visits, mother 1.89 3.47 148 022
Visits to mental healthcare providers, mother 0.09 1.45 148 022
Sick leave, mother 24.19 56.11 148 022
Age child 3 years
GP visits, child 0.28 0.65 148 022
Hospital visits, child 0.94 2.38 148 022
GP visits, mother 6.93 7.44 148 022
Hospital visits, mother 2.36 3.83 148 022
Visits to mental healthcare providers, mother 0.10 1.60 148 022
Sick leave, mother 31.51 63.15 148 022
46
Table A4. Background variables and experienced congestion controlling
for year-by-admitting-hospital.
(1) (2)
Bivariate Joint
Father
Lower secondary -0.0005* (0.0003) -0.0297 (0.0316)
Upper secondary 0.0002 (0.0003) -0.0206 (0.0270)
Master’s -0.0002 (0.0003) -0.0530 (0.0393)
Age 0.0025 (0.0042) -0.0004 (0.0021)
Immigrant -0.0004 (0.0003) 0.0106 (0.0345)
ln(income) 0.0033*** (0.0011) 0.0170** (0.0072)
Mother
Lower secondary -0.0004 (0.0003) 0.0243 (0.0295)
Upper secondary 0.0003 (0.0003) 0.0310 (0.0249)
Master’s 0.0002 (0.0003) 0.0273 (0.0360)
Age 0.0039 (0.0032) 0.0022 (0.0030)
Immigrant -0.0006* (0.0003) -0.0423 (0.0341)
ln(income) 0.0022* (0.0012) 0.0020 (0.0066)
Child female 0.0000 (0.0004) 0.0007 (0.0188)
Observations 148 022 148 022
Dep. mean 11.22 11.22
F-statistic for joint significance 1.21
Joint p-value 0.26
Note: Column (1) shows the results of separate linear regressions where the dependent variable is
the number of women admitted on the same maternity ward-day as the focal mother and the left
hand side variable is listed. In addition to the listed variables, the regression includes admissiondate-by-admitting-hospital FE. Column (2) shows the resulting estimation when all listed variables are
jointly included. In the bottom part of the table I report the F-statistic and p-value for a test of joint
significance of the reported variables. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
47
5
10
15
20
25 Number of women admitted
01jan2013 01apr2013 01jul2013 01oct2013 01jan2014
Date
# Admitted # Admîtted
Horizontal lines indicate 25th and 75h percentile and mean for the hospital-year
Figure A1. Raw variation in number of mothers admitted to an
anonymized hospital in 2013.
48
Table A5. Test of monotonicity assumption
(1) (2)
#admitted #admitted
Base sample Reverse sample
Congestion propensity quartile First Not first
#admitted ˆ 0.0426*** 0.0820***
(0.0087) (0.0047)
N 36986 111010
F-stat 23.83 303.00
Congestion propensity quartile Second Not second
#admitted ˆ 0.0372*** 0.0869***
(0.0070) (0.0052)
N 36992 111012
F-stat 28.47 282.71
Congestion propensity quartile Third Not third
#admitted ˆ 0.0447*** 0.1086***
(0.0068) (0.0055)
N 36982 111009
F-stat 42.78 391.22
Congestion propensity quartile Fourth Not fourth
#admitted ˆ 0.0415*** 0.0740***
(0.0080) (0.0043)
N 36989 111014
F-stat 27.23 298.89
Due date Yes Yes
Hospital Yes Yes
Note: First stage estimates. Samples split by congestion propensity score estimated by running an
OLS specification of congestion against all controls and fixed effects included in the main specification,
excluding the instrument. Each coefficient is estimated in a separate regression. Robust standard errors
in parentheses.
49
Table A6. Reduced form
(1) (2) (3)
N Ind. Analgesic
interv. labor
PN
i=1 due datebhd−i
-0.0040*** -0.0010*** -0.0003*
(0.0014) (0.0003) (0.0002)
Dep. mean 4.41 0.22 0.94
(4) (5) (6)
Emg. APGAR < 7 Child
C-section readmitted
PN
i=1 due datebhd−i
-0.0000 -0.0002* -0.0004**
(0.0002) (0.0001) (0.0001)
Dep. mean 0.13 0.02 0.05
Note: Outcomes defined in column titles. Each regression includes controls for parental age, education,
earnings and immigration status as well as the gender of the child, the due date and local ward fixed
effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Table A7. Use of pain relievers.
(1) (2) (3)
Analgesic Anesthesia Epidural
#admitted ˆ -0.0033* -0.0005 -0.0042
(0.0017) (0.0019) (0.0037)
Dep. mean 0.94 0.12 0.47
Note: Each coefficient is estimated in a separate regression. Each regression includes controls for
parents age, education, earnings and immigration status as well as the gender of the child and due date
and local ward fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
50
-.06
-.04
-.02
0
.02
.04 Number of interventions
-10 -5 0 5 10
Mothers w/ same due date as focal mothers' admittance date
(a) Number of interventions.
-.01
-.005
0
.005
.01 Induction
-10 -5 0 5 10
Mothers w/ same due date as focal mothers' admittance date
(b) Induced labor.
-.005
0
.005
.01 Analgesic
-10 -5 0 5 10
Mothers w/ same due date as focal mothers' admittance date
(c) Any analgesic.
Figure A2. Plots of reduced form.
Note: Each figure reports the binned residuals of outcomes and the number of mothers admitted.
The variables are residualized by means of the controls used in Equation 1. See note under Table 4 for
details.
51
-.01
-.005
0
.005 Emergency C-section
-10 -5 0 5 10
Mothers w/ same due date as focal mothers' admittance date
(a) Emergency C-section.
-.004
-.002
0
.002
.004 Apgar < 7
-10 -5 0 5 10
Mothers w/ same due date as focal mothers' admittance date
(b) APGAR < 7.
-.004
-.002
0
.002
.004 Child readmitted
-10 -5 0 5 10
Mothers w/ same due date as focal mothers' admittance date
(c) Child readmitted.
Figure A3. Plots of reduced form.
Note: Each figure reports the binned residuals of outcomes and the number of mothers admitted.
The variables are residualized by means of the controls used in Equation 1. See note under Table 4 for
details.
52
Table A8. Additional Outcomes.
(1) (2) (3)
Hospital Severe Severe postpart.
days laceration hemorrhage
#admitted ˆ 0.0122 0.0019 0.0006
(0.0128) (0.0013) (0.0011)
Dep. mean 3.24 0.03 0.02
(4) (5) (6) (7)
Mother read. Mother read. Child read. N
7 days 30 days 7 days compl.
#admitted ˆ -0.0002 -0.0009 -0.0027** -0.0003
(0.0010) (0.0012) (0.0013) (0.0106)
Dep. mean 0.02 0.03 0.04 5.48
Note:Outcomes listed in column titles. “read.” is short for “readmitted”. “compl.” is short for
“conplications”. “postpart” is short for “postpartum”. Each coefficient is estimated in a separate
regression. Each regression includes controls for parents age, education, earnings and immigration
status as well as the gender of the child and due date and local ward fixed effects. Robust standard
errors in parentheses.
Table A9. Main model without controls.
(1) (2) (3)
N Ind. Analgesic
interv. labor
#admitted ˆ -0.0423*** -0.0101*** -0.0034*
(0.0152) (0.0032) (0.0017)
Dep. mean 4.41 0.22 0.94
(4) (5) (6)
Emg. APGAR < 7 Child
C-section readmitted
#admitted ˆ -0.0001 -0.0016* -0.0038**
(0.0026) (0.0009) (0.0015)
Dep. mean 0.13 0.02 0.05
Note: Outcomes listed in column titles. Each coefficient is estimated in a separate regression. Each
regression includes controls for parents age, education, earnings and immigration status as well as the
gender of the child and due date and local ward fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
F-statistic first stage = 469.
53
Table A10. Main model without mothers living in Oslo.
(1) (2) (3)
N Ind. Analgesic
interv. labor
#admitted ˆ -0.0846*** -0.0151*** -0.0059**
(0.0253) (0.0053) (0.0029)
Dep. mean 4.48 0.22 0.94
(4) (5) (6)
Emg. APGAR < 7 Child
C-section readmitted
#admitted ˆ 0.0045 -0.0039** -0.0054*
(0.0042) (0.0016) (0.0029)
Dep. mean 0.13 0.02 0.06
Note: Each coefficient is estimated in a separate regression. Each regression includes controls for
parents age, education, earnings and immigration status as well as the gender of the child and due date
and local ward fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. F-statistic first stage 306.
Table A11. Main model with higher parity children.
(1) (2) (3)
N Ind. Analgesic
interv. labor
#admitted ˆ -0.0438*** -0.0108*** -0.0079***
(0.0121) (0.0028) (0.0029)
Dep. mean 3.39 0.18 0.78
(4) (5) (6)
Emg. APGAR < 7 Child
C-section readmitted
#admitted ˆ -0.0041** -0.0000 -0.0008
(0.0017) (0.0007) (0.0014)
Dep. mean 0.06 0.01 0.05
Note: Each coefficient is estimated in a separate regression. Each regression includes controls for
parents age, education, earnings and immigration status as well as the gender of the child and due date
and local ward fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. F-statistic first stage = 558.
54
Table A12. Compliers
(1) (2) (3) (4)
First stage se Population share FS / FS all
Full sample .0959 .0044 1 1
Predicted congestion quartile
1st .0426 .0087 .25 .44
2nd .0372 .007 .25 .39
3rd .0447 .0068 .25 .47
4th .0415 .008 .25 .43
Mother’s age
<= median (28) .0768 .0064 .47 .8
> median (28) .1011 .006 .53 1.05
Father’s age
<= median (30) .0927 .0068 .43 .97
> median (30) .0948 .0058 .57 .99
Mother’s income
<= median .0876 .0063 .5 .91
> median .0964 .0062 .5 1.01
Father’s income
<= median .0832 .0063 .5 .87
> median .1043 .0061 .5 1.09
Mother’s education
< Bachelor’s degree .0919 .0062 .51 .96
>= Bachelor’s degree .0921 .0062 .49 .96
Father’s education
< Bachelor’s degree .0852 .0054 .66 .89
>= Bachelor’s degree .0972 .0075 .34 1.01
Mother’s immigration status
Not immigrant .0973 .005 .81 1.01
Immigrant .0847 .0099 .19 .88
Father’s immigration status
Not immigrant .0959 .0049 .82 1
Immigrant .0931 .0103 .18 .97
Child’s gender
Male .0957 .0062 .52 1
Female .0967 .0064 .48 1.01
Note: Characterization of compliers. Sample split by predicted congestion based on observable characteristics, and separately in mutually exclusive groupings (denoted in italics) for each observable characteristic used in the main sample. The first column shows the estimated first stage for each sub-sample
with standard errors in Column (2). Population shares for each sub-sample are reported in Column (3)
and the relative size of the first stage for each sub-sample is reported in Column (3).
55
Table A13. Results by ward size.
(1) (2) (3)
N Ind.
interv. labor Analgesic
< 90th percentile #admitted ˆ -0.0912*** -0.0132** -0.0102***
ward size (0.0260) (0.0056) (0.0035)
Dep. mean 4.22 0.22 0.93
≥ 90th percentile #admitted ˆ -0.0501* -0.0114** -0.0006
ward size (0.0267) (0.0055) (0.0028)
Dep. mean 4.69 0.22 0.95
(4) (5) (6)
Emg. APGAR < 7 Child
C-section readmitted
< 90th percentile #admitted ˆ 0.0021 -0.0051*** -0.0081**
ward size (0.0046) (0.0017) (0.0032)
Dep. mean 0.14 0.02 0.06
≥90th percentile #admitted ˆ -0.0008 -0.0006 -0.0015
ward size (0.0043) (0.0016) (0.0023)
Dep. mean 0.13 0.02 0.04
Note: F-stat for mothers at smaller wards = 306 (N = 85 802), F-stat for mothers at larger wards =
134 (N = 62 203). Outcomes defined in column titles. Each regression includes controls for parental
age, education, earnings and immigration status as well as the gender of the child, the due date and
local ward fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
56
Table A14. Results using alternative measures of congestion.
(1) (2) (3)
N Ind. Analgesic
interv. labor
Centile #admitted ˆ

-4.3484*** -0.8598*** -0.1008
(1.3961) (0.2978) (0.1553)
Dep. mean 4.41 0.22 0.94
(4) (5) (6)
Emg. APGAR < 7 Child
C-section readmitted
Centile #admitted ˆ

-0.0386 -0.1530* -0.1512
(0.2254) (0.0865) (0.1537)
Dep. mean 0.13 0.02 0.05
Note: F-statistic running centile = 60. Each coefficient is estimated in a separate regression. Each
regression includes controls for parents age, education, earnings and immigration status as well as the
gender of the child and due date and local ward fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
57
Table A15. Results by pregnancy-related contacts prior to birth.
(1) (2) (3)
N Ind. Analgesic
interv. labor
< median #admitted ˆ -0.0314 -0.0135** -0.0041
#contacts (0.0275) (0.0058) (0.0035)
Dep. mean 4.31 0.19 0.93
≥ median #admitted ˆ -0.0709** -0.0121* -0.0024
#contacts (0.0309) (0.0065) (0.0030)
Dep. mean 4.63 0.26 0.95
(4) (5) (6)
Emg. APGAR < 7 Child
C-section readmitted
< median #admitted ˆ 0.0004 -0.0012 -0.0033
#contacts (0.0046) (0.0017) (0.0027)
Dep. mean 0.12 0.02 0.05
≥ median #admitted ˆ -0.0017 -0.0025 -0.0054*
#contacts (0.0051) (0.0019) (0.0031)
Dep. mean 0.15 0.02 0.06
Note: F-stat for mothers with fewer contacts = 131 (N = 61 067), F-stat for mothers with more
contacts = 131 (N = 65 649). Outcomes defined in column titles. Each regression includes controls for
parental age, education, earnings and immigration status as well as the gender of the child, the due
date and local ward fixed effects. See the Appendix for the definition of pregnancy-related contacts.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
58
A.2 Data details
The medical data used in this paper come from three separate sources:
The Medical Birth Registry of Norway (MFR), National Patient Registry
of Norway (NPR), and the Control and Payment of Health Reimbursement
(KUHR). Each of these registries follows separate coding procedures. I
detail the coding systems and codes used below.
The Medical Birth Registry of Norway (MFR) All births in Norway have
been required to be reported to the MFR since 1967. For each birth, midwives or physicians fill out a specific form on which they check off boxes for
various complications, treatments, interventions and birth outcomes. Over
time, the level of detail on the forms has increased and reports also contain
reporting on several interventions and complications through international
coding systems. In recent years the MFR has used a combination of different coding standards: mainly ICD-10, ATC, and a check-list system, but
also NCSP and NCMP. Categories on the check list are loosely based on
medical treatments and diagnoses also found in other coding systems such
as ICD-10, but do not completely overlap. Examples of cross-list items included are “Anesthesia”, and “perineal rupture grade 1 or 2” both of which
can be answered “yes” or “no”. When possible I have relied on ICD-10
codes and ATC codes, but for most variables I rely on the check-list system. I detail below how each of the medical outcomes is defined for each
registry.
The National Patient Registry of Norway (NPR) The NPR contains all
records of inpatient treatments in Norwegian public hospitals since 2008.
Each episode is recorded with institution, start and end dates and procedural codes in the ICD-10 standard. I use the registry to identify admission and discharge dates for birth-related hospitalization spells, institutions
(ward/hospital), and treatments related to pregnancies. As ICD-10 codes
are only available at the 2-digit level, I refer to the MFR for data on interventions during childbirth.
The Control and Payment of Health Reimbursements (KUHR) Each treatment provided at a public outpatient institution is reported to the KUHR
59
for reimbursement. Public outpatient institutions include all GP services,
public psychiatric services, etc. The data contain dates, service provider
type, and treatment provided. The data additionally contain information
on the reason for the visit in many cases. The ICPC-2 is the common
coding system for reporting in the KUHR.
60
Table A16. Construction and sources of health-related variables.
Variable Variable type Code type(s) Codes used Source(s)
Induction Dummy Check-list MFR
Emergency C-section Dummy Check-list MFR
Analgesic Dummy ATC and check-list N02 MFR
N interventions Integer Check-list MFR
APGAR 5 min. < 7 Dummy Constructed from check-list MFR
GP visits Integer KUHR
Hospital visits Integer NPR
Psychiatric visits Integer KUHR
Child readmitted within 30 days dummy NPR
Diagnoses related to pregnancy prior to birth integer
ICPC-2 A94, W3-5, W28-29, W70-76, W80-81, W84-85 KUHR
ICD-10 O10-16, O20-29, O30-39, Z35 NPR
Pregnancy-related contacts with healthcare providers integer
ICPC-2 W KUHR
ICD-10 Z34-35, O10-16, O20-29, O30-36 NPR
61